*•*•*••**•••*•*• 



^ ts:^ 




-A 



^ 



Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 





Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
"Step Out From the Old to the New" 



25Si1 V I i>ft!55«^N5*^ 



>^-^;^v<^^ 



IS 2250 (1981) : Code of Practice for Preparation and Use of 
Masonry Mortars [CED 13: Building Construction Practices 
including Painting, Varnishing and Allied Finishing] 



K^S£Vff/i3^^Si&:^^ 



5sat| V I i>ft!V%ft^>a«^ 



^l^^r^Wi^^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge" v^^^'^* 



v^ 



%^ i). 



% 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 



lir 



■k 



A 



BLANK PAGE 




^<LS££i 




^jji> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



tS : 22S0-1981 

( Reaffirmed 2000 ) 



Indian Standard 



CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 

PREPARATION AND USE OF 

MASONRY MORTARS 

( First Revision ) 

Third Reprint FEBRUARY 1993 



UDC 691-53 : 69001-3 



C) Copyright 1981 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Gr 7 July 1981 



IS : 2230 ■ 1981 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 

PREPARATION AND USE OF 

MASONRY MORTARS 



( First Revision ) 



Building Construction Practices Sectional Committee, BDC 13 

Chairman 

ShRI C. p. MAIylK 

C-4/38, Safdarjung Development Area, 
New Delhi 

Members Representing 

Shri Suraj S. J. Bahadur Housing & Urban Development Corporation 

Limited, New Delhi 
Shri A. N. Bajaj Forest Research Institute & Colleges, Dehra Dun 

Shri D. R. Batlivala Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay 

Shri J, R. Bhalla Indian Institute of Architects, New Delhi 

Shri M. C. Bhargava Public Works Department, Government of Uttar 

Pradesh, Lucknow 
Shri R. K. Mathur ( Alternate ) 
Chief Enoin-eeb ( Bldos ), PWD, Public Works Department, Government of Tamil 
Madras Nadu 

Superintending Engineer, 
( Special Building Circle ), 
PWD, Madubat ( Alternate ) 
Chief Engineer-cum-Additional Public Works Department, Government of 
Secretary to the Govern- Rajasthan 

MENT ( B & R ) 

Executive Engineer 

( Design & Specification ) ( Alternate ) 
Chief Engineer ( NDZ ) Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 

S UPERINTENDING S UB VEYOB 

OF Works ( NDZ ) ( Alternate) 
Director ( Architecture ), Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) 
RDSO, Lucknow 
Joint Dirkctob ( Architec- 
ture ), RDSO, Lucknow ( Alternatt ) 

( Continued oii page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1981 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

This publication is protected under the Indian Co0right Act (yilV of 1957) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS: 2250 -1981 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shui H. S- Dugai. Builders' Association oflndja, New Delhi 

Brig Harish Chandra ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. S. Grkwal Public Works Department, Government of 

Punjab, Chandigarh 
Shbi R. L. Kumar Institution of Surveyors, New Delhi 

Shri k.. S. Kharb {Alternate ) 
Shri M, 2. Kukien Tata Consulting Engineers, Bombay 

Shri G. K. Majumdab Hindustan Prefab Limited, New Delhi 

Shri H. S. Pasricha ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. C. Mangal Central Building Research Institute (CSIR), 

Roorkee 

Shri J. P. Jaisingh ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. K. PandaRE Life Insurance Corporation of India, Bombay 

Deputy Chief Engineer 
(North) (Alternate) 
Shbi G. M. Ranabe Public Works & Housing Department, Bombay 

Shbi T. K. Saban Bureau of Public Enterprises ( Ministry of 

Finance), New Delhi 

Shbi S. S. Kaimal ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. D, Singh Engineer-in-Chief 's Branch, Army Headquarters, 

New Delhi 

Shbi M. G. Vibmani ( Alternate ) 
Shbi S. R. Sivaswamy Gammon India Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi H. D. Matange ( Alternate ) 
Shbi K. S. Srinivasan National Buildings Organization, New Delhi 

Deputy Dibector ( Alternate ) 
Shbi Sushil Kumab National Buildings Construction Corporation Ltd, 

New Delhi 
Shbi B. T. Unwai,la Concrete Association of India, Bombay 

Shbi Y. K. Mehta ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. T. Unwalla Institution of Engineers ( India ), Calcutta 

Sbjb.1 Jiv Ai<i X> ATT (Alternate) 
Shbi G. Raman, Director Genera],BIS ( Ex-officio Member ) 



Director ( Civ Engg ) 



Secretary 

Shbi S. Sen Gupta 

Assistant Director ( Civ Engg ) , BIS 



Masonry Construction Subcommittee, BDG 13:7 

Convener 

Dr R. K. Ghosh Central Road Research Institute (CSIR), New 

Delhi 



Members 

NGINEER 

Shbi Daljii Singh ( Alternate ) 



CniEF Engineer National Buildings Construction Corporation Ltd, 

New Delhi 

( Continued on page 31 ) 



IS : 2250 ■ 1981 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 

PREPARATION AND USE OF 

MASONRY MORTARS 



( First Revision ) 



0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian 
Standards Institution on 27 February 1981, after the draft finalized by the 
Building Construction Practices Sectional Committee had been approved 
by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 

0.2 Choice of masonry mortar is governed by several considerations, such 
as type of masonry, situation of use, degree of exposure to weather, 
strength requirements, besides special considerations like fire resistance, 
insulation^ rate of setting and hardening, etc. The ingredients for mortar 
have also a wide variety. Cementitious ingredients may be cement or 
lime or combinations of these and with or without addition of pozzolanas, 
plasticizers, etc. The aggregates may be sand, burnt-clay aggregate or 
cinder. As many of these ingredients have a wide variation in charac- 
teristics, the proportions in which they are to be mixed depend largely on 
practical experience with local materials. However, with the development 
of standard specifications to govern the quality of cement, lime, sand and 
other pozzolanic materials, it is possible to apply some of the basic 
principles for selection and use of masonry mortars, which have accrued 
as a result of research work in this field in the country and abroad. This 
standard is intended to provide such guidance regarding properties and 
use of masonry mortars. 

0.3 This standard, published in 1965, was intended to bring out a long 
felt uniformity in the variety of practices being followed by various 
organizations in the country in the preparation of cement mortars, cement 
lime mortars and their use is masonry works. A separate standard, 
namely IS: 1625, was published in 1962 and revised in 1971 covering 
information regarding properties and preparation of lime mortars and 
their use in masonry works. The Sectional Committee responsible for 
the preparation of this standard, while taking up this revision, felt that 
the requirements for both cement mortars and lime mortars should be 



IS : 2250 . 1981 

brought together in one standard. Thus, this revision is prepared 
incorporating the provision of 18:1625-1971* and to incorporate 
improvements found necessary in the light of the usage of the standard, 
and the suggestions made by various organizations implementing it. 
IS : 1625-1971* will be withdrawn with the printing of this revision. 

0.3.1 In this revision, number of changes have been incorporated. The 
most significant being the gradation of masonry mortars only in terms of, 
their minimum compressive strength ( at the age of 28 days ), since 
proportioning of mortars by loose volume would not allow adjustment to 
take care of variations in the quality of the ingredients {see Table 1). 
However, volumetric proportioning ( by loose volume ) being the only 
practice being followed in the country, mortars in terms of diiferent 
nominal mix proportions and which would give the range of above 
compressive strengths ( at the age of 28 days ) have also been included in 
this revision as a guidance to the users. The technical committee 
responsible for the preparation of this revision feels that where facilities 
for determining the actual mix proportion corresponding to the specified 
grade are not available, the nominal mixes as specified in this revision 
may be used. The committee in this respect recognises the existence 
of additional mixes other than what has been included in this revision, 
which might provide greater flexibility of choice to the users. But it is 
fiftit that inclusion of all possible combinations might not only burden the 
code but also might not be needed for the construction of great majority 
of masonry. The committee also appreciates the necessity of reflecting 
the expected increase in strength of lime based mortars after 28 days, 
which is otherwise the basis of gradation of masonry mortars, and feels 
the necessity of including a provision for taking advantage of this 
expected increased strength. But in the absence of definite technical 
data, the concept of substantial growth in strength of lime based mortars 
after 28 days is being excluded from the present version. Investigations 
are in progress and the information will be added in the standard as 
and when available. Further, the method of mixing the ingredients for 
various types of mortars has been dealt in detail in this revision and the 
method of determining the compressive strength of mortars has been 
modified. Only SI units have been used in this revision. 

0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in 
accordance with IS: 2- 1960 1. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded oflf value should be the same as that of the specified value 
in this standard. 



♦Code of practice for preparation of lime mortar for use in buildings { first revision ] 
tRules for rounding off mimerical values ( revised). 



IS : 2230 - 1981 

1. SCOPE 

1,1 This standard covers the preparation of masonry mortars and their 
use in masonry works. 

Note — Use of mud mortars, gypsum mortars and bituminous mortars is not 
covered in this standard. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions in addition 
to those given in IS : 6508-1972* and IS : 4305-1 967t shall apply. 

2.1 Mortar — Mortar is a homogeneous mixture, produced by intimately 
mixing cementitious materials, water and inert materials, such as sand, 
to the required consistency for use in building together with masonry 
units. 

2.2 Lime Mortar — A mortar containing lime and sand. 

2.3 Composite Mortar — A mortar containing cement and lime in 
addition to other ingredients. 

2.4 Grade of Masonry Mortar — The 'grade' of a'^masonry mortar 
will be defined by its compressive strength in N/mm^ at the age 
of 28 days, as determined by the standard procedure detailed in 
Appendix A. 

2.5 Consistency — The working consistency of a mortar or plastering 
mix as judged by the worker from its behaviour during application. Its 
assessment includes characteristics, such as initial fluidity, water 
retentivity, etc. 

2.6 Hardening — The physio- chemical changes observed in a mortar 
due to the effect of one or more of the following phenomena: 

a) Absorption of carbon dioxide, 

b) Recrystallization, and 

c) Chemical reaction. 

2.7 Setting — The physical and chemical changes observed in a mortar 
mainly due to the hydration of hydraulic constituents of the mortar or 
due to the interaction of some of the constituents or a combination of both 
the types of reactions. 



♦Glossary of terms relating to building lime. 
fGlossary of terms relating to pozzolana. 



IS : 2250 - 1981 

2.8 Water Retentivity — The ability of mortars to retain water against 
suction and evaporation in general. It is indirectly a measure of the 
workability of mortars. It is measured by the flow of mortar when 
tested on a standard flow table before and after application of a specified 
suction ( see Appendix G ). 

2.9 Workability — That property of freshly mixed mortar which 
determines the ease and homogeneity with which it can be mixed, placed, 
^compacted and finished. It is the amount of energy to overcome 
friction and cause full consolidation. 

3. NECESSARY INFORMATION 

3.1 Proper selection of mortars for various uses depends upon the 
following factors: 

a) Type of masonry, namely brick work, stone work, concrete 
block work, etc, and strength of individual masonry unit; 

b) Situation of use of the masonry, namely, whether in foundation, 
superstructure, etc. Conditions of surrounding soil in the case 
of foundation work; 

c) Load which the masonry will have to bear; 

d) Conditions of exposure to weather or soil conditions in the case 
of masonry buried below ground level; 

e) Type and grading of fine aggregates to be used in the mortar, 
namely, whether sand, burnt-clay aggregate or cinder aggregate; 

f ) In the case of hydraulic structures weathering conditions under 
water contact and under water head action; and 

g) In case of use in storage of acidic or alkaline substances like 
fertilizers. 

4. MATERIALS 

4.1 Cement — Cement used in the preparation of masonry mortar shall 
conform to either IS: 269-1976* or 455-1976t or IS: 1489-1976+ or 



♦Specification for ordinary and low heat Portland cement ( third revision ) . 
^Specification for Portland slag cement ( third revision ). 
^Specification for Portland-pozzolana cement ( second revision ). 



IS : 2250 - 1981 

IS : 3466-1967* or IS : 8041-1978t or IS : 8043-19783: and IS : 8112-1976§. 

4.2 Fine Aggregate 

4.2.1 Sand — shall conform to IS : 21 16-1980!], 

4.2.2 Burnt-clay, fly ash and cinder aggregate shall conform to 
IS : 3182-197511, IS : 3812 ( Part III)-1966** and IS : 2686-1977tt. 

4.3 Lime - shall conform to IS : 712-1973+^ 

4.3.1 Hydraulic and semihydraulic limes corresponding to class A, B 
and E of IS : 712-1973:{:J are eminently suitable for use in masonry 
mortars, whereas fat limes corresponding to class C and D will require 
mixing of burnt clay pozzolana or other pozzolanic materials. Class 
C and D limes may also be used with addition of cement and pozzolanic 
materials. 

4.3.2 Glass A lime of IS : 712-1973J3: shall be supplied as hydrated lime 
alone. Class B, C, D and E lime as specified in IS : 712-1973{J shall be 
supplied both as quick lime and hydrated lime. Quick lime shall never 
be used for structural purpose. It must be slacked first. Slaking at 
site of work shall be done in accordance with IS : 1635-1975§§. 

Note — The quality and characteristics of lime are considerably influenced by 
the method of slaking in addition to the chemical composition. Also, inadequately 
slaked particles of lime will continue to hydrate after the lime is used in the mortar 
and consequently lead to defects, such as popping, blowing, crack development, 
etc. 

4.4 Lime Pozzolana Mixture - shall conform to IS : 4098-1967|l|!. 



♦Specification for masonry cement {first revision ). 

fSpecification for rapid hardening Portland cement {first revision ). 

JSpecification for hydrophobic Portland cement {first revision). 

§Specification for high strength ordinary Portland cement. 

IJSpecification for sand for masonry mortars {first revision). 

^Specification for broken brick ( burnt clay ) fine aggregate for use in lime mortar 
{first revision). 

** Specification for fly ash: Part III For use as fine aggregate for mortar and 
concrete. 

tt Specification for cinder aggregates for use in lime concrete {first revision), 

JJSpecification for building limes ( second revision ). 

§§Code of practice for field slacking of building lime and preparation of putty 
{first revision). 

litis pecification for lime-pozzolana mixture. 



IS : 2250 - 1981 

4.5 Pozzolana 

4.5.1 Burnt Clay Pozzolana - shall conform to IS: 1344-1968*. 

4.5.2 Fly Ash - shall conform to IS ; 3812 ( Part I )-1966t. 

4.6 Water — Water used for making masonry mortars shall be clean 
and free from injurious quantities of deleterious materials. Potable water 
is generally considered satisfactory for use in masonry mortar. For 
further requirements regarding limits of deleterious materials permitted 
reference may be made to IS : 456-1978:|:. 

4.7 Storage of Materials — Storage of materials shall Be in accordance 
with IS: 4082- 1977§. 

5. DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS 

5.1 Durability 

5.1.1 The durability of masonry mortars depends upon the following 
factors: 

a) Volumetric changes during the process of setting, hardening, and 
later due to temperature variations or due to moisture move- 
ments in the surroundings, and the extent to which the mortar 
will internally accommodate the stresses induced by these 
volumetric changes before yielding; 

b) The nature and distribution of the resulting cracks, whether as 
fine cracks well-distributed throughout or large localized 
cracks; 

c) The extent to which the bond between the mortar and the 
masonry units is ruptured by volumetric changes and structural 
movements resulting not only in reduction in strength of masonry 
but also in provision of channels of seepage for water and other 
solution into the masonry which would further the process of 
deterioration; and 

d) Resistance to chemical attack in aggressive environment. 



*Specification for burnt clay pozzolana {first rerinon). 
f Specification for fly ash: Part I For use as pozzolana. 
JGode of practice for plain and reinforced concrete ( third revision ). 
§Recommendations on stacking and storage of construction materials at site 
(first revision ). 

8 



IS : 2250 - 1981 

5.1.2 All mortars are likely to deteriorate to a greater or lesser extent 
under prolonged exposure to the environment. The rate of deterioration 
depends not only upon the composition of the mortar, but also upon 
thorough, uniform and intimate mixing and the workmanship in laying 
the masonry. 

5.1.3 Effect of Volume Change 

5.1.3.1 In the early stages, when mortar is green, temperature 
fluctuations and variations in moisture content cause volume changes 
that are detrimental to a masonry mortar in course of time. Generally, 
the effect of temperature fluctuations is negligible compared to that of 
moisture variation. If there is excessive volume change due to alternate 
wetting and drying, the bond between the mortar and the masonry is 
liable to be destroyed, causing cracks to appear in the hard set mortar. 

5.1.3.2 Since lime mortars undergo only negligible volume change 
after setting and initial shrinkage and the hardening of the mortar is 
also a slow process, the mortar is able to retain its bond with the masonry 
unit and be free from cracks. 

5.1.3.3 Lime mortars are also able to take normal movements in 
masonry mortar caused by volume changes by virtue of internal 
accommodation; in this process it will undergo elastic or creep deformations 
and may recover fully or partly. The extensibility of masonry mortar, 
which indicates its capacity for internal accommodation, ranges from 2 
to 3 X lO"*. This is generally larger than the volume change 
( maximum shrinkage ) that normally occurs in lime mortars on 
hardening. Because of the accommodation of the mortar, the stresses 
that develop due to various deformations, such as expansion, contraction 
and deflection, will get distributed in the mortar and their intensities 
will be low. 

5.1.4 Resistance to Sulphate Attack — The sources of sulphate giving rise 
to this trouble will be: 

a) in exceptional circumstances, sulphate derived from the brick 
constituting the masonry unit; 

b) sulphate contained in the sand or fine aggregate used in the 
mortar where sulphate content in these has to be allowed high 
from economic consideration; and 

c) sulphate from soil in the case of iTiasonry in contact with soil. 

5.1.4.1 The cement in the mortar will undergo expansive reaction 
in the presence of sulphate, which will lead to cracks in the mortar. 
Where serious sulphate attack is expected, Portland slag cement, or 



IS : 2250 - 1981 

Portland pozzolana cement may preferably be used instead of ordinary 
Portland cement. Other general precautions to be taken against sulphate 
attack in masonry design as well as workmanship are covered in 
18:2212-1962*. 

5.2 Hardening of Mortar — A masonry mortar should harden at 
such a rate that it causes no delay in the progress of work, but at the 
same time it is able to retain its plastic properties for a sufficient interval 
till the initial shrinkage of the mortor is complete. This will minimize 
the danger of cracks and opening of joints in masonry. The rate of 
hardening of lime mortars is slower than that of cement mortars, but is 
satisfactory for most of the normal building works, except where high 
strength is required. 

5.3 Strength Development 

5.3.1 Strength development is an important requirement before 
masonry is loaded to the full extent, and the rate of construction should 
synchronize^ith the development of the strength on masonry, particularly 
in the case of masonry with weak mortars. Extra time shall be allowed 
for hardening of mortar when the atmospheric temperature during 
construction is very low ( minimum 5®G in 24 h ). The period will have 
to be increased by 100 percent for the time during which the temperature 
remains below 5°G and by 50 percent for the time when temperature is 
between 5 and IQ°G. 

5.3.2 The strength of lime mortars is dependent on the class of lime 
(see IS : 712-1973t ) and other constituents used in the mortar 
( see Table 1 ). Incorporation of cement and/or pozzolana in lime mortar 
mixes made with Class B and Class E lime will increase the strength and 
rate of hardening of the mortars without appreciably reducing 
workability. 

5.4 Qjaantity of Water — The quantity of water to be added to the 
mortar shall be such that the working consistency ( see 2.1 ) is obtained. 
Excess water shall be avoided. 

6. GRADE OF MORTAR 

6.1 Masonry mortars shall preferably be specified by the grade in terms 
of their minimum compressive strength as given in Table 1. Masonry 
mortars in terms of mix proportion which gives the range of compressive 
strength ( at the age of 28 days ) values are also given in Table 1 for 
guidance. 

Note — The compressive strength of mortar shall be determined in accordance 
with the procedure given in Appendix A, 



*Code of practice for brickwork. 

tSpeciflcation for building limes ( second revision ) . 

10 



IS I 2250 - 1981 



TABLE 1 GRADE OF MASONRY MORTARS 

{ Clauses Q.3A, 5.3.2 and 6 A ) 
Gbade Mortar Mix ( by Loose Volume ) 



Sl 
No. 



(1) 



Cement Lime 



(2) 



(3) 



Fozzolana Lime Sand 
Pozzolana 
Mixture 



(4) 



1 


MM 0-5 





1 Bor E 


2 










3 







ICorD 


4 


MM 0-7 








5 










6 




1 


3CorD 


7 




1 





8 




1 





9 


MM 1-5 








10 










11 




1 





12 




I 





13 







lA 


14 


MM 2 





lA 


15 







ICorD 


16 




1 


2GorD 


17 










18 











(5) 





1 




c 

0*4* 







0-4* 





3* 









(6) 



(LP.7) 


1 
(LP-20) 

1 
( LP-40 ) 






1 
( LP-20 ) 

1 
{ LP-40 ) 









1 

{ LP-20 ) 

1 
( LP-40 ) 



(7) 

3 

1-25 
2 

1-5 
2-25 
12 
8 
10 
1-25 
2 
7 

8-75 
3 
2 

9 
1 
1-75 



CoMPRESglVE 

Strength at 
28 Days 



(8) 
N/mm* 

y 0*3 to 0-7 



y 07 to 1-5 



;• 1-5 to 2 



2 to 3 



( Continued ) 



11 



IS : 2250 - 1981 





TABLE 1 


GRADE OF MASONRY MORTARS - Contd 


Sl 

No. 


Ghahe 


MoRTAU Mix 


( BY Loose Volume ) 




Compressive 

Strength at 

28 Days 


Cement 


Lime ■ Pozzolana 


Lime 
Pozzolana 
Mixture 


Sand 


(1) 


(2) (3> 


(4) 


(5) 


(6) 


(') 


(8) 

N/mma 


19 


MM 3 


IC orD 


2* 









20 




IGorD 










21 













6 I 




22 





I A 








1 




23 


It 





0-21* 





4-2 1- 3 to 5 


24 
25 










0-4^ 


1 

( LP-40 ) 



1-5 1 

1 

■' 7-5 




26 


MM 3 1 








2 
( LP -20 ) 


12 

J 




27 
28 


MM 5 1 


to i B, C, 

DorE 











4 ^ 

5 




29 
30 









0-4 


I 

( LP-40 ) 



1 
6-25 


> 5 to 7-5 


31 , 







0-4 





5 




32 


MM 7-5 1 


iCor D 


.0 





3 




33 




*GorD 








4-5 




34 













4 




35 
36 


It 


■ 




' 0-2* 







2-1 
3 


^ 7" 5 And above 


37. 







. 0-4 





3-75 




.38 


MM 7-5 I 








I 


8 





( LP-20 ) 



J 



Note 1 — A, B, C, D and E denote the classses of limes to be used [see 
IS : 712-1973 Specification for building lime { revised) ]. 

Note 2 — The strength values of lime mortars given in the table are after wet 
grinding of the mortar ingredients. 

Note 3 — The eouipressive strength shall be determined in accordance with the 
procedure given in Appendix A. 

♦Pozzolana of minimum lime reactivity of 4 N/mm^. 

fThis ratio by volume corrospondes approximately to cement pozzolana ratio 
of 0-8: 0*2' bv weight. In this case, only ordinary Portland cement is to be used 
[see IS >: 269-1976 Specification for ordinary rapid hardening and low heat Portland 
cement ( third revision ) ] . 



12 



IS : 2250 - 1981 

7. CRITERIA FOR SELECTION OF MASONRY MORTARS 

7.1 The selection of masonry mortars from durability considerations 
will have to cover both the loading and exposure conditions of the 
masonry. The requirements for masonry mortar shall generally be as 
specified in 7.1.1 to 7.1.6 ( see also Table 1 ). 

7.1.1 In the case of masonry exposed frequently to rains and where 
there is further protection by way of plastering or rendering or other 
finishes, the grade of mortar shall not be less than MM 0*7 but shall 
preferably be of grade MM 2. Where no protection is provided, the 
grade of mortar for external walls shall riot be less than MM 2. 

7.1.2 In the case of load bearing internal walls, the grade of mortar 
shall preferably be MM 0'7 or more for high durability but in no case 
less than MM 0*5. 

. 7.1.3 In the case of masonry in foundations laid below damp-proof 
course, the grades of morter for use in masonry shall be as specified 
below: 

a) Where soil has little moisture, masonry mortar of grade not 
less than MM 0*7 shall be used; 

b) Where soil is very damp, masonry mortar of grade preferably 
MM 2 or more shall be used. But in no case shall the grade 
of mortar be less than MM 0*7; and 

c) W^here soil is saturated with water, masonry mortar of grade 
MM 3 shall be used but in no case shall the grade of mortar 
be less than MM 2. 

7.1.4 For masonry in buildings subject to vibration of machinery, the 
grade of mortar shall not be less than MM 3. 

7.1.5 For parapets, where the height is greater than thrice the 
thickness, the grade of masonry mortar used shall not be less than MM 3. 
In the case of low parapets, the grade of mortar shall be the same as 
used in the wall masonry below. 

7.1.6 The grade of mortar for bedding joints in masonry with large 
concrete blocks shall not be less than MM 3. 

8. PREPARATION OF MASONRY MORTARS 

8.1 Proportioiiiug — Cement shall be proportioned only by full bags. 
Hydrated lime, pozzolana and, aggregates shall be measured by volume 
using gauge boxes of suitable capacity. 

13 



IS : 2250 - 1981 

8.1,1 The quantities of some of the ingredients for measurement may 
also be taken on the basis of the unit weight. The unit weight of some 
of the materials in loosely placed condition are given in Table 2 for 
conversion from weight to volume. 



TABLE 2 UNIT WEIGHT OF MATERIALS IN LOOSELY PLACED 

CONDITION 



Unit Weight 



No. 


Material 


(1) 


(2) 


i) 


Sand { dry ) 


ii) 


Lime-pozzolana 
mixture 


iii) 


Pozzolana: 




a) Burnt-clay 
pozzolana 




b) Fly ash 


iv) 


Dry hydrated 
lime 



g/m^ 

(3) 

Variable 

( see Note ) 



700 to 840 

775 to 945 
570 to 600 

630 to 770 



Note 1 — Loosely placed condition is achieved by pouring or filling the material 
in the container loosely, that is, without giving any jerk to the container. 

Note 2 — The unit weight of dry and loose sand shall be found by actual field 
measurement. 



8.2 Preparation of Cement Mortar — Mixing shall be done 
preferably in a mechanical mixer. If done by hand, the operation shall be 
carried out on a clean watertight platform. Cement and sand shall be 
mixed dry in the required proportions to obtain a uniform colour. The 
required quantity of water shall then be added and the mortar mixed to 
produce a workable consistency. In the case of mechanical mixing, the 
mortar shall be mixed for at least three minutes after addition of water; 
in the case of hand mixing, the mortar shall be hold back and forth for 
5 to 10 minutes with addition of water. 

8.2.1 Generally, only as much quantity of cement mortar as would be 
sufficient for 30 minutes, work shall be mixed at a time. 



14 



IS : 2250 - 1981 

8.3 Preparation of Lime Mortar 

8.3.1 Slaking of Lime — If lime is supplied in the form of quick lime, 
it shall be slaked and run into putty, if necessary, in accordance with 
18:1635-1975*. 

8.3.2 Mixing of Lime Mortars 

8.3.2.1 Putty and sand in the specified proportions shall be mixed 
with or without addition of water on a dry waterproof platform or in a 
mixer. The mix shall then be fed into a mortar mill with the required 
addition of water. The mortar shall be raked continuously during 
grinding, particularly in the angular edges of the mortar mill. Water 
may be added during grinding as required, but care shall be taken not 
to add more water than to bring the material to the working consistency. 
The mixing shall be done till every particle of the aggregate is coated 
uniformly with the cementitious material. 

Note — Grinding of lime mortars shall be done, if necessary. 

8.3.2.2 Dry hydrated lime and sand in specified proportions shall be 
mixed dry first and shall then be fed into a mortar mill with required 
additions of water. The mixing shall be done in accordance 
with 8.3.2.1. 

Note — When factory made dry hydrated lime conforming to IS : 712-19731 is 
used, grinding of the Hme and sand in the mortar mill is not necessary. 

8.3.3 Generally, only as much quantity of lime mortar ( except 
made with Glass A lime ) as would be sufficient for day's work shall be 
mixed at a time. If eminently hydraulic lime ( Class A ) is present as an 
ingredient, the mortar shall be used within 4 hours after grinding. 

8.4 Preparation of Composite Mortar 

8.4.1 Where coarse sand is used, the lime putty and sand in the 
required proportions shall, after preliminary mixing on a watertight 
platform, with necessary addition of water, be ground in a mortar mill 
taking care to rake up continuously the mortar particularly at the corners, 
and also adding water as and when required during grinding. This mix 
shall then be transferred to a mechanical mixer to which the required 
quantity of cement is added and the content mixed for at least three 
minutes. 



♦Code of practice for field slaking of building lime and preparation of putty 
{first revision). 
fSpecificatinn for building limes ( second revision ). 

15 



IS : 2250 - 1981 

8.4.2 Where fine sand is used, the mixing operations shall be done in 
the same manner as in 8.4.1, except that grinding may be omitted for the 
preliminary mixing of lime putty and sand. 

NoTii; — When factory made dry hydrated lime conforming to IS : 712-1973* is 
used, grinding of lira^e and sand in the morlar mill is not necessary. 

8.4.3 If the mixture of lime putty and sand is not used immediately 
for mixing with cement, it shall be kept protected from drying out till the 
time of use. 

8.4.4 When adding water in the mortar during mixing operations, it 
shall be ensured that it is added only to the extent necessary for obtaining 
working consistency for the mortar and not more. 

8.4.5 Where pozzolana is used in the mortar, the pozzolana shall first 
be mixed with the lime in the specified proportions and ground in a 
mortar mill with the addition of required quantity of^ water. Sand 
shall then be added to the mix and mixing and grinding repeated till 
every aggregate particle gets coated uniformly with the cementitious 
material. Mixing after addition of cement shall be done in the same 
manner as described in 8.4*1 in a mechanical mixer. 

8.4.6 Generally, only as much quantity of composite mortar as would 
be sufficient for 4 hours, work shall be mixed at a time. 

8.5 Preparation of Mortars Using Lime-Pok^zolana Mixtures — 

Mortars using lime-pozzolana mixtures shall be prepared in the same 
manner as described in 8.2. 

8.5.1 Mortars with lime-pozzolana mixture of type LP 20 and LP 40 
as binder shall be used within 4 hours from the time of mixing of the 
mortar, whereas mortars which have hydraulic lime ( Class B ) or fatlime 
( Glass G ) and pozzolana or lime-pozzolana mixture of type LP 7 as 
ingredients, but do not have either Portland cement or eminently 
hydraulic lime ( Glass A) shall be used within 12 to 24 hours from the 
time of mixing of the mortar. 

8.6 Retempering of Mortars 

8.6.1 In the case of mortar using cement, the mortar that has stiffened 
because of evaporation of water from the mortar may be re-tempered by 
adding water as frequently as needed to restore the requirements of 
consistency. But this re-tempering shall be permitted only within 60 
minutes from the time of addition of cement. 



♦Specification for building limes ( second revision ). 

16 



IS : 2250 - 1981 

9. CONSISTENCY OF MASONRY MORTARS 

9.1 The working consistency of the mortar is usually judged by the worker 
during application. The water should be enough to maintain the 
fluidity of the mortar during application, but at the sam.e tim.e it shall 
not be excessive leading to segregation of aggregates from the cementi- 
tious material. The quantity of water needed for maintaining 
consistency or fluidity will also depend upon the masonry to which the 
mortar is used; for example, thinner joints will require greater fluidity; 
bed joints subject to heavy pressure may require stiffer mortar. Also, the 
mortar should be able to hold the water against suction by the masonry 
unit, particularly in the case of burnt clay and concrete products. 

9.1.1 The consistency of mortars shall be measured in accordance with 
the procedure given in Appendix B and the following values of depth of 
penetration are recommended. 

For laying walls with solid bricks 90 to 130 mm 

For laying perforated bricks 70 to 80 mm 

For filling cavities 130 to 150 mm 

9.2 Water Retentivity — Measurement of water retentivity may be 
necessary only in the case where mortar is to be used with masonry unit 
which has got high suction characteristics. Water retentivity shall be 
determined as described in Appendix C and the flow after suction in the 
test shall not be less than 70 percent of the flow before suction. 

10. SAMPLING OF FRESHLY MIXED MASONRY MORTARS 

10.1 Apparatus — The following apparatus is required: 

a) According to the method being used, either a metal receptacle 
of not Jess than 1 litre capacity or a scoop; and 

b) Airtight containers. 

10.2 Procedure — Samples shall be obtained by taking uniformly 
distributed increments ( preferably from material in motion, provided 
this can be carried out in safety ), and mixed to form a thoroughly 
combined bulk sample. The number of increments and the size of bulk 
sample necessary will depend upon the quality of the material and its 
variability and the accuracy of the test results required. 

10.2.1 Batch Mixes — The mortar shall be sampled at the discharge 
point of a batch from the mixer. Not less than three increments shall 
be taken at about the times when one-quarter, one-half and three- 
quarters of the batch have been discharged. The increments shall be 

17 



IS : 2250 - 1981 

taken by passing the dry, clean, metal receptacle across the stream of 
mortar in such a manner as to collect a thoroughly representative sample 
of mortar. 

10.2.2 Hand Mixes — The mortar shall be turned over with clean, dry 
shovel and samples taken by means of the scoop at regular spacings 
throughout the mass. 

10.2.3 Heaps — In the case of heaps, the increments shall be taken from 
material well below the surface in at least twelve different places in the 
mass, distributed in a regular manner, so as to ensure, when mixed, 
a thoroughly representative cpmbined sample. 

10.2.4 Reduction of Bulk Sample — The increments or sub-samples taken 
in accordance with any of the methods described above shall immediately 
be combined and thoroughly mixed and reduced to a sample of not less 
than 10 kg and placed in one or more airtight containers. 

Note — If consistency test is to be made on a sample, arrangements shall be 
made to carry out the tests at the point of sampling. 

10.3 Partiimlars of Sample — The following particulars shall be 
recorded and the sample container marked accordingly: 

a) The date, 

b) Place and method of sampling, and 

c) The date of preparation and the quantity of the batch or 
consignment. 



APPENDIX A 

{Clauses lA, 6.1, and Table 1 ) 

D]^TERMINATION OF COMPRESSIVE STRENGTH OF 
MASONRY MORTAR 

A-1. OBJECT 

A-1.1 To determine the compressive strength of the masonry mortars, 

A-2. APPARATUS 

A-2.1 Scales — The scales used in weighing materials for mortar mixes 
shall conform to the following requirements: 

On scales in use, the permissible variation at a load of 2 000 g 
shall be ± 2*0 g. The permissible variation on new scales shall be 
one-half of this value. The sensibility reciprocal shall be not 
greater than twice the permissible variation. 

18 



IS I 2250 - 1981 

A-2.2 Specimen and Moulds - — The test specimens shall be cubes of 
size 50 mm and shall conform to the requirements given in A-2.2.1. 

A-2.2.1 Cube Moulds — The moulds for the 50 mm cube specimen shall 
be metal not attacked by cement, cement-pozzolana mixture or lime- 
pozzolana mixture and there shall be sufficient strength and stiffness to 
prevent spreading and warping. The moulds shall be rigidly constructed 
in such a manner as to facilitate the removal of the moulded specimen 
without damage. The moulds shall be machined so that when assembled 
ready for use, the dimensions and internal faces shall be accurate to the 
following limits: 

The height of the mould and the distance between the opposite 
faces shall be 50 ± 0*1 mm. The angle between adjacent interior 
faces and between interior faces and top and bottom planes of the 
mould shall be 90 i 05 degrees. The interior faces of the moulds 
shall be plane surfaces with a permissible variation of 0'03 mm. 
Each mould shall be provided with a base plate having a plane 
surface machined to a tolerance O'lO mm and made of non- 
absorbent, non-corridible and non-reactive material. The base 
plate shall be of such dimensions as to support the mould during 
the fiUing without leakage. 

The parts of the mould when assembled shall be positively held 
together, and suitable methods of ensuring this, both during the 
filling and on subsequent removal of the filled mould, shall be 
provided in order to prevent the moulded specimen from damage, 

A-2.3 Mixing Apparatus — The mixing apparatus shall conform to the 
requirements specified in A-2.3.1 and A-2.3.2. 

A-2.3.1 Mixer — The mixer shall be an electrically driven mechanical 
mixer which shall consist essentially of the following: 

a) A stainless steel mixing bowl with a nominal capacity of 5 litres 
of the shape and dimensions as shown in Fig. 1 and provided 
with means by which it can be securely fixed to the mixing frame 
during mixing, and 

b) A mixer blade of the form and dimensions shown in Fig. 2 
revolving about its axis as it is driven in a planetary movement 
around the bowl by an electric motor. 

A-2.3.1. 1 The two directions of rotation shall be opposite. The 
speed of rotation during mixing shall be as follows: 

a) Blade revolving about its own axis 140 ± 5 rev/min 

b) Planetary movement 62 ± 5 rev/min 
Note — The above bowl and blade shall be used when the mass of the solid 

material including putty is between 3 and 4"5 kg. 

19 



IS : 2250 - 1981 



T 



-200DIA- 



'^[■,4- L 



/^^StDE HANDLE 




30R 



All dimensions in millimetres. 
Fig. 1 Mixing Bowl 



20 



IS : 2250 - 1981 





All dimensions in millimetres. 
Fro. 2 Paddle 



5-K 0.1 1^ 
I 1 



'■J i 



21 



IS : 2250 . 1981 

A-2.3.2 A plastic scraper. 

A-2.4 Tamping Rod — A metal bar 25 mm square and 200 mm long. 

A-2.5 Trowel — -This shall have a steel blade 100 to 150 mm in length 
with straight edges. 

A-2.6 Flow Table ~ The flow table shall be as given in IS: 5512-1969*. 

A-3. PREPARATION OF MOULDS 

A-3.1 The interior faces of the specimen moulds shall be thinly covered 
with mineral oil or light cup grease. After the moulds are assembled, 
excessive oil or grease shall be removed from the interior faces and the 
top and bottom surfaces of each mould. Moulds shall then be set on 
plane, non-absorbent non-corrodible and non-reactive base plates that 
have been thinly coated with mineral oil, petrolatum, or light cup 
grease. 

A-4. PREPARATION OF MORTAR 

A-4.1 The mortar shall be of the materials and proportions intended for 
use in the construction mixed to give a flow of 110 to 115. The mixing 
procedure for sample made in the laboratory shall be as given 
in A-4.2.1. 

A-4.1. 1 Trial Mixing — Trial mortars shall be made v/ith specified 
proportion of dry ingredients and adding diflferent percentages of water 
i^ptil the specified flow is obtained. Each trial shall be made with fresh 
mortars. The mixing shall be done mechanically as described 
inA-4.1.1.1toA"4.1.1.5. 

A-4.1.1.1 The mixing of the ingredients shall be carried out at a 
temperature of 27 ± 2*C and ail ingredients before mixing shall be 
brought to the same temperature. 

A-4.1.1.2 The dry ingredients shall then be placed in the mixing 
bowl and mixed for 30 seconds. Over the next 30 seconds, while mixing, 
water shall be poured at a uniform rate into the bowl and the mixing 
shall be continued for 60 seconds. 

A-4.1.1.3 The mixer shall then be stopped and the paddle and sides 
of the bowl shall be cleaned down in about 15 seconds with the plastic 
scraper. The bowl shall be covered with a damp cloth and the mortar 
be allowed to stand for a period of 10 minutes. 



♦Specification for flow table for use in tests of hydraulic cements and pozzolanic 
materials. 

22 



IS : 2250 - 1981 
A-4.1.1.4 The mortar shall then be remixed for 60 seconds. 

A-4.1.1,5 When using lime putty, the procedure shall be as described 
above, except that the sand and Ume putty shall be premixed by hand 
or in the mixer until the lime appears to be uniformly distributed. 

A-4*2 Remixing of Mortars in the Laboratory — Samples of mortar 
received in the laboratory for testing shall be examined for any leakage or 
evaporation and segregation or bleeding of the liquid. The whole of the 
sample, with any liquid which has separated or has condensed inside the 
container, shall be transferred as completely as possible to an 
impermeable working surface and remixed, using a trowel, until it 
appears homogeneous. 

A-4.2.1 The top of the flow table shall be carefully wiped clean, 
dried and the flow mould shall be placed at the centre. A layer of 
mortar about 25 mm in thickness and mixed in accordance with A-4.1.1 
shall be placed in the mould and tamped 20 times with the tamping rod. 
The tamping pressure shall be just sufficient to ensure uniform filling of 
the mould. The mould shall then be filled to overflow with mortar 
and tamped, as specified for the first layer. The mortar shall be cut oflf 
plane and level with the top of the mould by drawing the straight edge 
of a trowel ( held perpendicular to the mould ) with a sawing motion 
across the top of the mould. The top of the table shall be wiped clean 
and dried, taking care to remove any water from around the edge of the 
flow mould. The mould shall then be lifted away from the mortar and 
the flow table shall be immediately dropped through a height of 12 "5 mm, 
25 times in 15 seconds. The flow is the resulting increase in average 
base diameter of the mortar mass, measured on at least four diameters 
at approximately equispaced intervals expressed as a percentage of the 
original base diameter. 

A-5. TEST SPECIMENS 

A-5.1 Cubes — The mould as prepared under A-3.1 shall be filled with 
the mortar to about half height and the layer compacted by tamping it 
with the tamping rod ( see A-2.4 ) in a uniform manner over the mortar 
surface in such a way as to produce full compaction of the mortar with 
neither segregation nor excessive laitance. The mould shall then be 
completely filled and the upper layer of the mortar compacted in a 
similar manner, after which the surface of the mortar shall be struck oflT 
plane and level with the top of the mould, using a trowel ( see A-2.5 ). 

A-5.2 Curing and Storage of Test Specimens — The specimens shall 
be stored at a place free from vibration, either in moist air at a temperature 
of 27 ± 2°G and relative humidity of not less than 90 percent or under 
damp sacks, matting or other suitable damp material covered 

23 



IS r 2250 - 1981 

completely with polyethylene or other similar imprevious sheeting, at a 
temperature of 27 ± 2°C for 1 to 3 days, depending on the early 
strength of the mortar, from the time of adding the water to the other 
ingredients. The specimen shall then be marked for later identifications, 
removed from the moulds and stored in clean water until the time of test. 
The temperature of the storage water shall be 27 ± 2''C, 

Note — Lime mortar cubes may, however, be stored in the laboratory air at a 
temperature of 27 :iz 2°C for the entire curing period. 

A-5.2.1 When cubes are made at site, records of the maximum and 
minimum air and water storage temperature shall be kept during the 
period, using maximum and minimum thermometers or continuous 
recording instruments. The cubes shall be sent to the testing laboratory 
when they are not less than 3 days nor more than 7 days old, well 
packed in damp sand or in wet sacks, and when necessary enclosed in 
polyethylene bag or sealed container, so that they arrive at the laboratory 
in a damp condition not less than 24 h before the time of test. On 
arrival at the testing laboratory, the cubes shall be stored in clean water 
maintained at a temperature of 27 ± 2°C until the time of test. 

A-5.3 Number of Specimens — Three or more specimens shall be 
made for each period of test specified. 

A-6. PROCEDURE 

A-6.1 The specimen shall be tested immediately on removal from the 
curing water in which it has been stored and while it is still in a wet 
condition. Any loose material shall be removed from the sides of the 
specimen. The dimensions of the specimen shall be noted before testing. 
The bearing surfaces of the testing machine shall be wiped clean and the 
specimen shall be placed in the machine in such a manner that the load 
shall be applied to opposite sides of the cube as cast, that is, not to the 
top and bottom. 

A-6.2 The axis of the cube shall be carefully aligned with the centre of 
thrust of steel plates bearing the testing machine. No packing other than 
auxiliary steel plates shall be used between the faces of the specimen and 
steel platens of the testing machine. 

A-6.3 The load on the specimen shall be applied without shock and at a 
uniform rate of 2N/mm2 to 6N/mm^ per minute until failure occurs. 

A-6.4 The maximum load at failure shall be noted. 

24 



IS t 2250 - 1981 

A-7. CALCULATION 

A-7,1 The compressive strength shall be calculated as follows: 

„ . , /1VT / ON Maximum load at failure (N) 

Compressive strength (N/mm^) = — p^ -: z -. ~-r^ 

^ o \ ; / Cross-sectional area ( mm'' ) 

A-7.1.1 The individual results shall be calculated to the nearest 
0-05 N/mm2. 

A-S. REPORT 

A-8.1 The average of all the determinations shall be reported. 

APPENDIX B 

{Clause 9.1.1) 

DETERMINATION OF CONSISTENCY OF MASONRY 

MORTAR 

B-1. OBJECT 

B-1.1 To determine the consistency of masonry mortar. 

B-2. APPARATUS 

B-2.1 This shall consist of a standard cone weighing 300 ± 2 g, 150 mm 
in height, and a diameter at a base of 75 mm. The cone is mounted on 
a vertical shaft fastened to an adjustable holder. The holder has a 
mechanism which releases the shaft. The apparatus has also an 
instrument dial which records the depth of penetration of the cone into 
the mortar mix kept in a conical container below. 

B-2.1.1 The conical container for mortar shall be 180 mm deep with a 
diameter at top of 150 mm. 

B-2.2 Flow Table — This shall be as given in IS : 5512-1969*. 
B.3. PROCEDURE 

B-3.1 The conical container shall be filled with mortar m^xto a level 
that is 1 cm below its rim. Mortar mix shall be placed in a conical 
mould in one continuous operation and shall be compacted by tamping 



♦Specification for flow table for use in tests of hydraulic cements and pozzolanic 

materials. 

25 



IS : 2250 - 1981 

rod as given in A-2.4. The mould filled with mortar mix is bumped 5 
or 6 times over a flow table so as to level the surface of the mortar. The 
container shall be placed over the base below the penetration cone of the 
apparatus, as shown in Fig. 3. The apex of the penetrating cone shall 
be brought first in contact with the surface of the mortar and the cone 
clamped in position. The instrument dial is set to be in contact with a 
cone at this position. The cone is then released and allowed to sink into 
the mortar mix. After the cone has stopped penetrating into the mortar, 
the dial is once more set to record the position of the cone and the 
difference between dial readings before and after penetration gives the 
depth of penetration of the cone into the mortar. 

B-3.1.1 The test shall be repeated on another sample of the mortar. 
B-4. REPORT 

B-4.1 The average of the two determinations shall be reported as the 
consistency of the mortar. 

B-5. FIELD TEST 

B-5.I For quick field determination, the procedure may be further 
simplified. The shaft of the cone shall be held by hand in a 
perpendicular position so as to be in contact with the surface of the mortar 
and gently released to sink into the mortar taking care that the shaft 
remains vertical during penetration. The depth of penetration may be 
computed from the measurement of the wetted depth along the surface 
of the cone. 



APPENDIX C 

{Clauses 2.8 and 9.3 ) 

DETERMINATION OF WATER RETENTIVITY OF 
MASONRY MORTAR 

CI. OBJECT 

C-1,1 To determine the water retentivity characteristics of masonry 
mortar. 

C-2. APPARATUS 

C-2,1 Apparatus Assembly for the Water Retention Test — For 

the retention test, an apparatus essentially the same as that shown in Fig. 4 
shall be used. This apparatus consists of a water aspirator or other 

26 



IS : 2250 - 1981 




DIAL GAUGE ROD 



INSTRUMENT DIAL 



ADJUSTABLE HOLDER 



PENETRATIN6 
CONE 



COMICAL 
CONTAINER 



PLATFORM 



Fig. 3 Standard Cone Apparatus 



27 



IS : 2250 - 1981 



V« TO 1-6 HOLES 




GASKET 



/ / / / . , .. 
Ill/// /•{ 



— 48 HOLES 
^^2 HOLES 
—36 HOLES 
-30 HOLES 
—24 HOLES 

— 18 HOLES 

— <2 HOLES 

— 6 HOLES 
. — 1 HOLE" 



-FUNNEi 



TO ASPlRATOft 




/-PPESSURE CONTROt 

'/ DEVICE 



All dimensions in millimetres. 
Fio. 4 Apparatus Assembly for Water Retention Test 



28 



IS : 2250 - 1981 

source of vacuum controlled by a mercury column relief and connected 
by way of a three-way stopcock to a funnel upon which rests a perforated 
dish. The perforated dish shall be made of metal not attacked by 
masonry mortars. The metal in the base of the dish shall have a 
thickness of I'l to 1-9 mm and shall conform to the outline shown 
Fig. 4. The bore of the stopcock shall have 4 mm diameter, and the 
connecting glass tubing shall have a minimum inside diameter of 4 mm. 
A mercury manometer, connected as shown iri Fig. 4, indicates the 
vaccum. A synthetic rubber gasket shall be permanently sealed to the 
top of the funnel and shall be lightly coated with petrolatum or light cup 
greiise during the test to ensure a seal between the funnel and the dish. 
Care shall be taken to ensure that none of the holes in the perforated 
dish is clogged from the grease used on the rubber gasket. Hardened 
filter paper of a grade equivalent to Carl Schleicher & SchuelJ filter paper 
No. 576 or to Whatman No, 50 filter paper shall be used. It shall be of 
such diameter that is will lie flat and completely cover the bottom of 
the dish. 

C-2.2 Straight Edge — Steel straight edge should be not less than 
200 mm long, and not less than 1*5 mm nor more than 3 mm in thickness. 

G-2.3 Otherv Apparatus — Other apparatus required for the water 
retention test shall conform to the requirements specified in Appendix A. 

C-S. PROCEDURE 

C-3,1 Adjust the mercury relief column so as to maintain a vacuum of 
5 cm as measured on the manometer. Seat the perforated dish on the 
greased gasket of the funnel. Place a wetted filter paper in the bottom 
of the dish. Turn the stopcock to apply the vacuum to the funnel and 
check the apparatus for leaks and to determine that the required suction 
is obtained. Then turn the stopcock to shut off the vacuum from the 
funnel. 

C-3.2 Mix the mortar to a consistency to give a flow of 110 to 115 (see 
3,1 ). Immediately after making the flow test return the mortar on 
the flow table to the mixing bowl and remix the entire batch for 15 
seconds at medium speed. Immediately after remixing of the mortar, fill 
the perforated dish with the mortar to slightly above the rim. Tamp the 
mortar 15 times with the tamper. Ten of the temping strokes shall be 
applied at approximately uniform spacing adjacent to the rim of the dish 
and with the long axis of the tamping face held at right angles to the 
radius of the dish. The remaining five tamping strokes shall be applied 
at random points distributed over the central area of the dish. The 
tamping pressure shall be just sufficient to ensure filling of the dish. On 
cpmpietion of tamping, the top of the mortar should extend slightly above 

29 



IS : 2250 - 1981 

the rim of the dish. Smooth off the mortar by drawing the flat side of 
the straight edge ( with the leading edge slightly raised ) across the top of 
the dish. Then cut off the mortar to a plane surface flush with the rim 
of the dish by drawing the straight edge with a sawing motion across the 
top of the dish in two cutting strokes, starting each cut from near the 
centre of the dish. If the mortar is pulled away from the side of the 
dish during the process of drawing the straight edge across the dish, 
gently press the mortar back into contact with the side of the dish using 
the tamper. 

C-3.3 Turn the stopcock to apply the vacuum to the funnel. The time 
elapsed from the start of mixing the cement and water to the time of 
applying the vaccum shall not exceed 8 minutes. After suction for 60 
seconds quickly turn the stopcock to expose the funnel to atmospheric 
pressure. "" Immediately slide the perforated dish off from the funnel, 
touch it momentarily on a damp cloth to remove droplets of water and 
set the dish on the table. Then, using the bowl scraper, flow and mix 
the mortar in the dish for 15 seconds. Upon campletion of mixing, 
place the mortar in the flow mould and determine the flow. The entire 
operation shall be carried out without interruption and as quickly as 
possible, and shall be completed within an elapsed time of 11 minutes 
after the start of mixing the cement and water for the first flow 
determination. 

C-4. CALCULATION 

C-4.1 Calculate the water retention value for the mortar as follows: 

Water retention value = — ^— X 100 

where 

A ~ flow after suction, and 

B = flow immediately after mixing. 



30 



IS : 2250 - 1981 



( Continued from page 2) 

Members 

Shri I. S. Chopra 
Shbi K. S. Khabb 
SffBi Jebt Malhotba 
Shbi Y. K. Mehta 

Shbi V. D. Londhb ( Alternate ) 
Db S. S. Rehsi 



Representing 

Tirath Ram Ahuja Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 
Institution of Surveyors, New Delhi 
Indian Institute of Architects. Punjab 
Concrete Association of India, Bombay 



Railway Board, New Delhi 

National Buildings Organization, New Delhi 



Central Building Research Institute ( CSIR ), 
Roorkee 
Shbi B. K. Jindal ( Alternate ) 
Senior Civil Engineer ( Designs/ 
Special ) Nobthebn Railway 
Shri K. S. Srinivasan 

AssiSTAi^T Directoe ( Alternate ) 
Superintending Engineer Public Works Department, Government of Tamil 
( Planning & Designs ) Nadu, Madras 

Executive Engineer, 
( Building Centbb ) ( Alternate) 
SuPBBiNTENDiNO ENGINEER AND Public Works & Housing Department, Bombay 

Deputy Secretary (B) 
SupERiNTENomo SuRVEYOB ov Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 
Works { Food ) 
SuBVEYOBS OP WoEKS ( FooD ) ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. M. Tandon Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters, 

New Delhi 
Shri B. S. Gopalan {Alternate ) 



31 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters : 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg. NEW DELHI 110002 
Telephones : 331 01 31 Telegrams : 

331 13 75 (Common 

Regional Offices : 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9, Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, 

NEW DELHI 110002 
•Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, 

V.I. P. Road, Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700054 
Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 
t Western : Manakalaya, E9 Ml DC, MaroL Andheri (East). 
BOMBAY 400093 
Branch Offices : 

'Pushpak', Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, AHMADABAD 380001 
t Peenya Industrial Area, 1st Stage, Bangalore-Tumkur Road, 

BANGALORE 560058 
Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T.T. Nagar, 

B NOPAL 462003 
Plot No. 82/83, Lewis Road, BHUBANESHWAR 751002 
Kalai Kathir Building, 6/48-A Avanasi Road, COIMBATORE 641037 
Quality Marking Centre, N-H- IV, N-l-T-, FARIDABAD 121001 
Savitri Complex, 116 G. T. Road, GHAZIABAD 201001 
53/5 Ward No. 29, R.G. Barua Road, 5th By-lane, 

GUWAHATI 781003 
5-8-56C L. N, Gupta Marg. ( Nampally Station Road ) 

HYDERABAD 500001 
R14 Yudhister Marg, C Scheme, JAIPUR 302005 
117/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 
Plot No, A-9, House No. 561/63, Sindhu Nagar, Kanpur Road, 

LUCKNOW 226005 
Patltputra Industria Estate, PATNA 800013 
District Industries Centre Complex, Bagh-e-Ali Maidan 

SRINAGAR 190011 
T. C. No. 14/1421, University P. 0., Palayam. 

THIRUVANANTHAPURAM 695034 
Inspection Offices (With Sale Point) : 
Pushpanjali, First Floor, 205-A West High Court Road. 

Shankar Nagar Square, NAGPUR 440010 
Institution of Engineers (India) Building, 1332 Shivaji Nagar. 

PUNE 411005 



Manaksansthe 

to all Offices) 

Telephone 

f331 01 31 

Z331 13 75 

37 86 62 

218 43 

41 2916 
6 32 92 95 



'Sales Office Calcutta is at 5 Chowringhee Approach. 
P. O. Princep Street, CALCUTTA 

t Sales Office is at Novelty Chambers, Grant Road, BOMBAY 

X Sales Office is at Unity Building, Narasimharaja Square, 
BANGALORE 



2 63 48 
39 49 55 

55 40 21 

5 36 27 
2 67 05 

8-71 19 96 

3 31 77 

23 10 83 

6 34 71 
21 68 76 

5 55 07 

6 23 05 



6 21 04 

52 51 71 
5 24 35 

27 68 00 

89 65 28 
22 39 71 



Primed at Dee Kay Printers. New Delhi. India 



