**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 848 (2006) : Specification for Synthetic Resin Adhesives 
for Plywood (Phenolic And Aminoplastic) - [CED 20: Wood and 
other Lignocellulosic products] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 848 : 2006 

Indian Standard 

SYNTHETIC RESIN ADHESIVES FOR PLYWOOD 
(PHENOLIC AND AMINOPLASTIC) — SPECIFICATION 

( Second Revision ) 



ICS 790,060.10; 83.180 



O BIS 2006 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

yif^^r 2006 Price Group 3 



wc< OAO . tnniC 



AMKNDMENTNO. 1 AUGUST 2007 

TO 

IS 848 : 2006 SYNTHETIC RESIN ADHESIVES 

FOR PLYWOOD (PHENOLIC AND 

AMINOPLASTIC) — SPECIFICATION 

( Second Revision ) 

(Page 2, Tah/e I ) — Insert the following Note at the end ot the table 

NOI [ - Ihe cytici of drying or soaking can be made up of a number of shorter periods of drying or 
so.tknig In such instances the specimen shall be kept in atr at 27 ± 2X in between the shorter periods 
constituting ihc drying cycle and be kepi submerged in water at 27 ± 2*'C m between the shorter 
periods constituting the soaking cycle 

(CFD20) 



Reprography Unit BIS New Delhi India 



AMENDMENT NO. 2 NOVEMBER 2011 

TO 

IS 848 : 2006 SYNTHETIC RESIN ADHESIVES FOR PLYWOOD (PHENOLIC 

AND AMINOPLASTIC) - SPECIFICATION 

(Second Revision ) 

{Page 2, clause 5) — Substitute the following for the existing: 
'5 QUALITY OF RESIN ADHESIVES 

The resin adhesives shall conform to the following, as applicable: 

a) Liquid Resin Adhesives — The adhesives shall comply with the requirements specified in 7, 
when the resin and hardener have been stored in closed containers under conditions as 
specified by the resin/adhesive manufacturer and the adhesive is tested within the shelf life. 

b) Film/Powder Resin Adhesives — The adhesives shall comply with the requirements 
specified in 7, when these have been stored in closed packaging/containers under conditions 
as specified by the adhesive manufacturer and the adhesive is tested within the shelf life. ' 



(CED 20) 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



Wood and Other Lignocellulosic Products Sectional Committee* CED 20 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Wood and Other Lignocellulosic Products Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division 
Council. 

Adhesives form one of the most important raw materials used in the plywood industry and woodworking and joitiery 
industry. The selection of the adhesives and their proper uses are important factors controlling the quality of the plywood 
or the joinery work produced. There has been enormous improvement in the quality of indigenous raw materials for 
adhesives. 

Tlijs standard was first published in 1957. The first revision was issued in 1974 based on experience gained in the 
manufacture and use of synthetic resin adhesives. In the present revision, the lest methods have been modified to assess 
the performance of the adhesive for manufacture of various grades of plywood. The test methods are based on the 
studies carried out at Indian Plywood Industries Research and Training Institute and found to be suitable for plywood 
made with forest grown as well as plantation timber, while meeting the end use requirements. 

In the formulation of this standard, due weightage has been given to international co-ordjnation among the standards 
and practices prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field in this country. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed 
orcalculated, expressing the result ofa test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for 
rounding off numerical values {revised)'. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be 
the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



IS 848 : 2006 



Indian Standard 

SYNTHETIC RESIN ADHESIVES FOR PLYWOOD 
(PHENOLIC AND AMINOPLASTIC) — SPECIFICATION 

( Second Revision ) 



1 SCOPE 

This standard prescribes the requirements for phenolic 
and aminoplastic synthetic resin adhesives used in the 
plywood industry, covering liquid, powder and film 
adhesives 

2 REFERENCES 

The standards hsted below coi .i provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of this 
standard At the time of publication, the editions indicated 
were valid All standards are subject to revision and parties 
to agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most recent 
editions of the standards indicated below 



IS No 
707 1976 



Tiiie 



Glossary of terms applicable to timber 
technology and utilization (second 
revision) 

1734 Methods of test for plywood 

(Part I) 1983 Determination of density and moisture 
content {second revision) 

(Part 5) 1983 Test for adhesion of plies {second 
revision) 

3 TERMINOLOGY 

3.1 For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given 
in IS 707 and the following shall apply 

3.1.1 Assembly Time 

3.1.1.1 Open assembly time —The time elapsing between 
the application of the adhesive and assembly of joint 
components 

3.1.!. 2 Closed assembly time — The time elapsing 
between assembly of the joint components and the 
application of pressure and temperature 

3.1.2 Adhesive 

3.1.2.1 Closed contact adhesive — A non-gap-filling 



adhesive suitable for use only in those joints where the 
surfaces to be joined may be brought into close contact by 
means of adequate pressure and where glue line exceeding 
12 mm may be avoided with certainity 

3.1.2.2 Gap filling adhesive ~ An adhesive suitable for 
use in those joints where the surfaces to be joined may or 
may not be in close or continuous contact owing either to 
impossibility of applying adequate pressure or to slight 
inaccuracies m machining 

3.1.3 Extender — A substance added to the adhesive 
either to reduce the cost of gluing or to reduce penetration 
through the veneers or both 

3.1.4 Filler — An inert substance, such as wood flour or 
metal oxide added to alter the characteristics of the resin, 
for example to reduce brittleness of the synthetic resin or 
to inhibit excess penetration of the resin into veneer or 
wood The term ^filler' is sometimes synonymously used 
with 'extender' 

3.1.5 Fortifier — A substance used primarily to improve 
the water resistance and durability of hot setting resins 

3. 1 .6 Hardener (Catalyst) — A material added to resin to 
bring about or promote the curing of resin 

3.1.7 Pot life — The time between the mixing of the 
constituent parts of an adhesive and its reaching the age 
when It IS no longer usable 

3.1.8 Shelf Life — The period up to which adhesive or 
adhesive components may be stored without affecting their 
suitability for use in accordance with the standard 

3.1.9 Spread of Adhesive — The area in m^ of the surface 
of substrate covered by 1 kg of solid/liquid resin 

3.1.10 Synthetic Resm — Amorphous organic materials 
produced by the polymerization or condensation of one, 
two or less frequently three relatively simple compounds 
The term is also applied now-a-days to chemically 
modified natural resins The properties of synthetic resins 
can vary widely depending upon their basic raw materials, 



IS 848 : 2006 



proportions and conditions of manufacture. Alt synthetic 
resins are classified broadly as thermosetting or 
thermoplastic. 

3.1.11 Phenolic Synthetic Resm — A phenolic synthetic 
resin is derived from the reaction of phenol with an 
aldehyde. 

3.1.12 Aminoplastic Synthetic Resin — An aminoplastic 
synthetic resin is derived from the reaction of urea, thio- 
urea, melamine or allied compounds or mixtures of these 
compounds with formaldehyde. 

3.1.13 Synthetic Resin Adhesive — A composition, 
substantially consisting of a synthetic resin of either the 
phenolic or aminoplastic type including any hardening 
agent, fortifier, filler or extender, which may be required 
to be added before use according to the manufacturer's 
instructions. 



4 TYPES 

Depending upon their degree of resistance, synthetic resin 
adhesives for plywood shall be of the three types as 
specified in Table I . The characteristics of each type shall 
be as given in Table I . For the guidance of users in selecting 
the grade of resin adhesive satisfying the requirements for 
practical work, recommended use of each type is also 
indicated in Table 1 . 

5 KEEPING QUALITIES 

The keeping qualities of resin adhesives shall be as follows: 

a) Liquid Resin Adhesives — The adhesives shall 
comply with the requirements specified in 7, after 
the resin and hardener have been stored in the 
original closed containers according to the 
manufacturer's instructions up to the date 
recommended by the manufacturer. 



Table 1 Characteristics of Different lypes of Synthetic Resin Adhesives 

{Clauses 4 and 7.3.2) 



SI 
No. 

(I) 


Typt 


Cyclic Test 


Criteria of Conformity 


Recommended Use 


(2) 


0) 


(4) 


(5) 





BWP 


Six cycles, each cycle consisting 


No separation of plies at the edges 


Adhesives of the type have been 




(Boiling Walcr Proof) 


of 8 h boiling in water and 


and/or surface at the end of six 


proved to make joints highly 






thereafter drying at 65 ± 2*'C for 


cycles 


resistant to weather, cold and 






t6h 


On forcible separation of plies 
with knife, wood failure shall be 
predominant and shall be more 
than 75% for excellent bond and 
not less than 50% for pass 
standard For less than 50% wood 
failure, the specimen shall be 
considered as failed 


boiling water, steam and dry heat 



ii) BWR 

(Boiling Water Resistant) 



III) MR 

(Moisture Resistant) 



Three cycles, each cycle 
consisting ofSh boiling in water 
and thereafter drying at 65 ± 2°C 
for 16 h 



Three cycles, each cycle 
consisting of 3 h at 60 ± 2X in 
water and thereaner drying at 
65 ± 2^ for 8 h 



No separation of plies at the edges 
and/or surface ai the end of three 
cycles 

On forcible separation of plies 
with knife, v/ood failure shall be 
predominant and shall be more 
than 75% for excellent bond and 
not less than 50% for pass 
standard For less than 50% wood 
failure, the specimen shall be 
considered as failed 

No separation of plies at the edges 
and/or surface at the end of three 
cycles 

On forcfible separation of pties 
with knife, wood failure shall be 
predominant and shall be more 
than 75% for excellent bond and 
not less than 50% for pass 
standard For less than 50% wood 
failure, the specimen shall be 
considered as failed 



Joints made of this type of 
adhesives will survive exposure to 
weatherforonlyafcwyears They 
will withstand cold water 
indefinitely and boiling water for 
a limited period 



Joints made with these adhesives 
withstatKi cold water for a long 
period and hot water for a limited 
time, but fail in boiling water 



IS 848 : 2006 



b) Film/Powder R^sin Adhesives — The adhesives 
shall comply with the requirements specified in 7, 
after these have been stored in accordance with the 
manufacturer's written instructions up to the date 
recommended by the manufacturer. 

6 INSTRUCTIONS FOR USE 

6.1 The manufacturer shall furnish written instructions 
detailing the manner in which each resin or recommended 
combination of resin(s), hardener(sX filler, fortifier and 
extender shall be used. The instructions shall give 
information in the manner indicated under 6.2 and 6.3, as 
applicable. 

6.2 Shelf-Life of Adhesive or Adhesive Components 

The manufacturer shall specify the shelf-life of the 
adhesive or adhesive components. 

6.3 Preparation for Use 

The preparation of resin, hardener, fortifier, filler and 
extender, methods of mixing, recommended types of 
mixing, apparatus and necessary precautions of any kind 
shall be stated. 

6.4 Usable Life of Mixed Adhesive or Pot Life 

The maximum time shall be stated during which the 
adhesive maintained at temperatures of 1 5"C, 20°C, 25°C, 
30°C, 40'*C and 45°C would remain fit for use so as to 
comply with the requirements of this standard. 

6.5 Applications 

Guidance on the following points shall be given: 

a) Range of moisture content of wood, at the time of 
gluing; 

b) Preparation of wood surfaces; 

c) Method(s) of application, such as single or double 
spread; 

d) Normal amounts of spread for single glue line; 

e) Maximum and minimum open and closed assembly 
times; 

f) Recommended range of temperature in °C and 
specific pressure in kg/cm^; 

g) Recommended pressing time for given thickness 
in minutes; 

h) Post treatment of finished products; 

j) Cleaning of containers; and 

k) Tests. 

6.6 Setting Times and Conditions 

The recommended range of temperature to which the 



adhesives in any glue line may be subjected and also the 
minimum and maximum time for which pressure shall be 
maintained on fiat panels at temperatures within the range 
shall be stated. 

7 TESTS 

7.1 Sampling 

A representative sample shall be drawn from each batch 
of adhesive. Such sample shall in each case be tested 
separately and not be bulked with other samples or 
otherwise averaged. 

7.2 Preparation of Test Pieces 

The test pieces shall be prepared according to the 
instructions given in Annex A. Veneers used for the 
preparation of test pieces shall comply with the 
requirements specified in A-1. 

7.3 Cyclic Test 

7.3.1 Test specimens shall be prepared in accordance 
with 7.2. 

7.3.2 Test specimens have to be tested as per the 
schedule given in Table 1, under cyclic test for BWP, 
BWR or MR types. 

7.3.3 Af^er cyclic test in accordance with 7.3,2. each 
specimen shall be further examined/tested In manner 
specified in 7.3.3.1 and 7.3.3.2. 

7.3.3. 1 Visual examination shall be carried out at the edge/ 
surface of the specimen to find out whether any 
de lamination/separation of plies have taken place. 

7.3.3.2 Forcible separation of plies shall be carried out 
by the knife test method described in IS 1 734 (Part 5). 

7.3.4 Criteria of Conformity 

The specimens, when tested in the manner specified 
in 7.3.2 and 7.3.3 shall conform to the criteria of 
conformity given in Table 1 . 

7.4 Acidity and Alkalinity (/iH) 

ThepH of the adhesive, when set, shall be not less than 
2.0. The /jH shall be determined by the method described 
in Annex B. 

8 RETEST 

In the event of failure to comply with any of the 
requirements specified under 7.3 to 7.4, the batch of 
material concerned shall be retested in respect of such 
requirement(s). In the event of failure of retest, the batch 
shall be rejected. 



IS 848 : 2006 



9 MARKING 

9.1 Each container shall be legibly and indelibly marked 
with the following; 

a) Manufacturer's name or distinguishing mark, 

b) Description of material, 

c) Batch number, 

d) Date of manufacture, 

e) The date beyond which the adhesive components 
shall not be used when stored under conditions 
recommended by the manufacturer, 

Reference to the manufacturer's instructions for 



use, and 
g) The words 'To be stored in a cool dry place'. 

9. 1 . 1 BIS Certification Marking 

Each container may also be marked with the Standard 
Mark. 

9.1.1.1 The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the 
provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 
and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The details 
of the conditions under which the licence for the use of 
the Standard Mark may be granted to the manufacturers 
or producers may be obtained fi-om the Bureau of Indian 
Standards. 



ANNEX A 
(Clause 7.2) 

METHOD OF PREPARATION OF TEST PIECES 



A-1 VENEERS FOR TEST PIECES 

A-I.I Veneers shall be rotary cut from species actually 
used by the manufacturer or be supplied by the resin 
manufacturer alongwith the resin sample. 1.6 mm thick 
veneer with the growth rings approximately parallel to the 
face shall be used. 

A-1.2 The veneers shall be smooth cut on both faces, 
straight grained and free from all defects, at least over the 
area that will form the middle common length of the test 
pieces and may be lightly sanded. Elsewhere the 
occurrence of slight defects, such as small uplifts, smalt 
live knots and distorted grain may be disregarded. The 
moisture content of the veneers when determined by the 
method described in IS 1734 (Part 1) shall be 6.0 ± 2.0 
percent for aminoplastic resin when used in liquid adhesive 
form and 12.0 ± 2.0 percent for powder/film adhesive, as 
may be recommended by the manufacturer. 

A-2 PREPARATION OF ADHESIVE 

The adhesive shall be prepared and used according to the 
instructions supplied by the manufacturer. 

A-3 CONSTRUCTION OF TEST BOARDS 

The test boards shall be constructed by bonding together 
three veneers of 1 .6 mm thick as supplied or recommended 
by the resin manufacturer. The size of the board shall be 



such that all the test pieces required for testing can be 
taken out of the same board leaving a margin of 25 mm on 
the four edges. The grain of the core veneer shall be at 
right angle to that of the two face veneers. The prepared 
adhesive may be applied to both sides of the core or to the 
inner surface of each face veneer or as directed by the 
manufacturer of the resin, but care shall be taken in alt 
cases to ensure that the adhesive is uniformly spread and 
the surfaces completely coated. The veneers shall then be 
assembled and loaded onto a flat platen press within the 
time specified in the manufacturer's instructions. The 
pressing conditions shall be as recommended by the resin 
manufacturer. Film glues shall be emplpyed by simple 
inter-leaving and in accordance with the manufacturer's 
instructions. 

A-4 CONDITIONING OF TEST BOARDS 

Immediately after removal from the press, the boards shall 
be given a special treatment if stipulated by the 
manufacturer. The boards shall then be exposed at 
prevailing laboratory atmospheric conditions in a manner 
to ensure a free circulation of air around them for six to 
nine days, or for such time as the manufacturer may direct. 

A-5 PREPARATION OF TEST PIECES 

After conditioning of the test bgards, six test specimens 
of size 125 mm ^ 125 mm having full thickness of the 
board shall be prepared from two boards made as above 
taking three test specimens from each board. 



IS 848 : 2006 



ANNEX B 
{Clause 7.4) 

DETERMINATION OFpH (HYDROGEN ION CONCENTRATION) VALUE OF LIQUID OR 
POWDERED RESIN ADHESIVES 



B-1 DETAILS 

At least 1 00 g of the adhesive shall be prepared according 
to the resin manufacturer's instructions. If water is to be 
used in the mixing, only distilled water shall be used. The 
adhesive shall be stirred thoroughly. After stirring, about 
20 ml of the mixed adhesive shall be spread in a thin, even 
coat of 0.5 mm on a sheet of clean glass to cover an area 
approximately 1 50 mm x 250 mm. The adhesive shall be 
cured at the temperature and the length of time 
recommended for gluing by the manufacturer, after which 
the cured film shall be peeled from the glass and ground 
in a clean mill or mortar to a fineness so as to pass 
450 micron IS sieve. Immediately, after grinding, 2.0 g of 



the ground particles, accurately weighed, shall be placed 
in a clean vial or small heat-resisting glass flask and 1 ml 
of freshly boiled, cooled distilled water shall be added 
and thoroughly stirred. The glass container shall be kept 
stoppered at all the times except when pH determinations 
are being made. The mixture shall be allowed to stand for 
72 h at room temperature after which time the mixture 
shall be stirred and the pH value determined by means of 
a suitable pH meter. The determination ofpH value shall 
be repeated at intervals of 24 h until the difference between 
the consecutive readings is not more than 0.05 pU units. 
The last reading taken shall be regarded as the equilibrium 
film pH value for the adhesive. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
'BIS Catalogue* and 'Standards : Monthly Additions*. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. CED 20 (7335). 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters : 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110 002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 33 75, 2323 94 02 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
(Common to all offices) 



Regional Offices : 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEWDELHni0 002 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M. V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 
KOLKATA 700 054 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160 022 



Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600 113 



Western 



Branches 



Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 
MUMBAI400 093 



Telephone 

{2323 76 17 
2323 38 41 

{2337 84 99,2337 85 61 
2337 86 26,2337 9120 

{260 38 43 
260 92 85 

{2254 12 16,2254 14 42 
2254 25 19,2254 23 15 

{2831 92 95, 2832 78 58 
2832 78 91,2832 78 92 



AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. 
GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM. 



IVioted at E^ftbhat Offset Pteu, New Delhi-2 



