•••*****•*•••••• 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 



Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 



Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
'The Right to Information, The Right to Live' 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



IS 13916 (1994) : Code of practice for installation of glass 
fibre reinforced plastic (GRP) piping system [CED 50: 
Plastic Piping System] 




frx^ j i iw&9*±&z& iv^^rrrF^ 



[SS^ V I l>5ft>5^>«SV: 



^^\\X^L 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledg 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 




<a^EL 




!**> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



*rrefter *rr^ 



IS 13916 : 1994 

( Reaffirmed 2004 ) 



^t^r Tm srsrfacr ^rfts^ (*ft sttt <ft) qrffq^r 

Indian Standard 

INSTALLATION OF GLASSFIBRE REINFORCED 

PLASTIC (GRP) PIPING SYSTEM — 

CODE OF PRACTICE 



UDC 621 : 643-2 [ 678-0675 ] : 006-76 



© BIS 1994 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



July 1994 



Price Group 5 



Plastic Pipes and Fittings Sectional Committee, CED 50 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Plastic Pipes and Fittings Sectional Committee had been approved, by the Civil Engineering Division 
Council. 

With the publication of IS 12709 : 1994 'Specification for glass fibre reinforced plastic ( GRP ) pipes, 
joints and fittings for use for potable water supply (first revision )', the technical committee felt it neces- 
sary to prepare a code of practice for the installation of these pipes so as to provide guidelines for the 
users to follow a uniform and correct method. This code has been prepared with this in view. 

The committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex A. 



IS 13916 : 1994 



Indian Standard 

INSTALLATION OF GLASSFIBRE REINFORCED 
PLASTIC (GRP) PIPING SYSTEM — 

CODE OF PRACTICE 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard describes procedure of laying GRP 
piping system installation and includes requirements 
for trenching, handling, jointing, compaction of back 
filling and post installation hydrostatic test. 
1.1.1 This code does not cover installation that require 
special attention, techniques and materials like: 

a) Pipe through rigid walls, 

b) Subaqueous piping, and 

c) Plant or pumping station piping. 
NOTES 

1 Pipes, fittings and rubber gaskets to be used for instal- 
lation of piping system as per this code shall conform to 
the following standards: 

a) The GRP pipes, jointing and fittings shall conform 

to IS 12709 : 1993. 

b) The Rubber gasket shall conform to IS 5382 : 1985. 

2 Appropriate stiffness class of the GRP pipe ( see IS 
12709 : 1994 ) shall be selected to withstand the overbur- 
den (dead load), live load and vacuum conditions, if any, 
considering site conditions. 

2 REFERENCES 

The following Indian Standards are necessary adjuncts 
to this standard: 

IS No. Title 

5382 : 1985 Rubber sealing rings for gas mains, 
water mains and sewers {first revision ) 

G.L. 



IS No. 
12709 : 1993 



Title 



Specification for glass-fibre rein- 
forced plastics ( GRP ) pipes, joints 
and fittings for use for potable water 
supply {first revision ) 

2720 Methods of test for soils : Part 7 

(Part 7) : 1980 Determination of water content dry 
density relation using light com- 
paction ( second revision ) 
3 TERMINOLOGY 

3.0 The terms defined in IS 12709 : 1994 shall apply 
in addition to those defined in 3.1 to 3.13 ( see Fig. 1 ). 

3.1 Bedding 

Bedding is the sound granular material directly beneath 
the pipe in the trench bottom. Bedding includes the 
basic trench foundation '£' if required plus especially 
prepared layer of sand T' on which pipe will rest. 

3.2 Coupling Area of Joint 

This is the space inside the socket in which the rubber 
ring gasket operates. 

3.3 Groove 

This is a seating made by turning to lodge the rubber 
ring gasket. It possesses the section laid down in the 
design and is machined at one end of each pipe section 
or in the coupling as the case may be. 




:<r: 



: offl'.'^qL" 



<— * ..-«*^. ^— » *"*» »C3 « , -» -• >-*" 



Fig. 1 Trench Cross Section Showing Terminology Relationship 



IS 13916 : 1994 



3.4 Leading in 

This is the initial part of the socket and assists insertion 
of the rubber ring gasket. 

3.5 Pipe Zone (B) 

It is the trench cross section area from the bottom of the 
pipe to a minimum of 300 mm above the top of the pipe 
and is filled with sound granular soil ( see 3.12 ). 

3.6 Primar} Backfill 

It is the initial compacted backfill within the pipe zone 
upon which the pipe will depend for side support and 
will consist of sound granular material. 

3.7 Relative Compaction 

It means the density of compacted, dry site soil 
expressed as a percentage of laboratory standards, as 
determined by the procedure. 

3.8 Ring Deflection 

It means an out of round condition not exceeding 5% 
of the diameter of a pipe section as a result of external 
loads imposed upon it. 

3.9 Rubber Ring Gasket or Packing 

This is a rubber ring having the section, diameters and 
hardness specified by the design and forms the 
hydraulic seal for the pipes. 

3.10 Secondary Backfill (C) 

It is between the pipe zone and ground level and is filled 
with properly compacted native soil. 

3.11 Socket 

In this part of a pipe, the end of the pipe bearing the 
rubber ring gasket is inserted or it is a coupling with 
rubberring gaskets as the case may be. 

3.12 Sound Granular Soil 

It shall be crushed rock with a size range of 5 mm to 
25 mm, pea gravel or sand. 

3.13 Unstable Ground 

It shall mean native soil which are soft, mushy and/un- 
stable to stand vertically when excavated and which can 
not be expected to provide a firm foundation or side 
support. 

4 HANDLING 

4.1 Transportation 

All pipe sections and fittings shall be supported on 
timber saddles spaced at 4 m centres with a maximum 
overhang of 2 m. Stock height should not generally 
exceed 2 m. Pipes shall be strapped to the vehicle over 
the support points using non-metallic pliable straps or 
ropes only. 

4.2 Storing of Pipe and Fittings 

4.2.1 Pipes and fittings with diameters of less than I m 
may be stored directly on sandy soil, the ground should 
be flat and free from sharp projection and stones/rocks 
bigger than 40 mm in diameter or of other potentially 
damaging debris. 

4.2.2 Pipes with diameters greater than 1 m may be 
stored on their delivery cradles at a maximum distance 



of 6 m c/c. 

4.2.3 If the surface is not flat or is sloping, then all the 
pipes shall be checked to prevent rolling. 

4.2.4 All rubber rings, gaskets and other items shall be 
stored in a cool, dry and dark place to avoid damage of 
any kind. 

4.2.5 The containers of lubricants should be kept tight- 
ly closed to avoid entry of dirt. 

4.3 Unloading, Lifting and Lowering 

4.3.0 The following procedures should be followed so 
as to eliminate potential damage to pipes and fittings 
and to maintain maximum safety during unloading, 
lifting and lowering. 

4.3.1 All the pipes and fittings shall be lifted with 
pliable straps, slings or ropes. These may be canvas or 
polyester belts with a minimum width of 10 cms or 
nylon ropes with a minimum diameter of 30 mm. Steel 
cables or ropes shall not be used for lifting and transpor- 
tation of pipe. Ropes shall not pass through the section 
of the pipe end to end. 

4.3.2 Straight continuous lengths of pipe may be lifted 
at one point. However, owing to its very smooth surface 
it is usually safer for the pipe to be lifted at two points. 

4.3.3 Pipe assemblies fabricated in multiple sections 
or special places shall be lifted with two or more lifting 
points. 

4.3.4 Pipes shall not be dropped to avoid impact or 
bump. If any time during handling or during installa- 
tion, any damage, such as gouge, crack or fracture 
occurs, the pipe shall be repaired if so permitted by the 
competent authority before installation. 

4.3.5 Pipes of different diameters may be nested to 
reduce the transportation cost and space. Denesting 
accomplished by starting with smallest size by lifting 
slightly with an inserted padded beam to suspend and 
carefully moving it out of the bundle without touching 
the other pipes. 

NOTE - Stacking of different diameter pipes by nesting 
however, is not permitted, except in their original 
transport packing. 

5 PD?E JOINTING 

5.0 General 

The pipe shall have a jointing system that shall provide 
for fluid tightness for the intended service conditions. 
Selection of different pipe jointing system depend upon 
location, site and working condition, pressure and flow 
of liquids. 

5.1 Unrestrained Pipe Joint 

These pipe joints are capable of withstanding internal 
pressure but not longitudinal forces. These joints how- 
ever can accommodate the linear variation of the pipe 
due to temperature variation. 

5.1.1 Spigot and Socket Joint with Single Water Tight 
- Rubber R ing Gasket/Packing 

This type of joint enables a pipeline to be laid speedly 



IS 13916 : 1994 



and is suitable for low (up to 3 PN) pressures in burned 
lines ( see Fig. 2 ). 




yjsjjjjj* 



7?t/ssJi 



Fig. 2 Illustrationof Spigot and Socket Joint with 
Single Rubber Gasket 

5.1.2 Spigot and Socket Joint with Double Watertight 
Rubber Ring Gasket/Packing 

This joint is made with double rubber ring and is 
suitable for high pressure (3 PN and above) ( see 
Fig. 3). 




V t ft Ni\ 



Fig. 3 Illustration of Spigot and Socket Jointwith 
Double Rubber Gasket 

5.1.3 Double Socket Coupling Joint with Watertight 
Rubber Ring Gasket/ Packing 

This joint is made with double socket type coupling and 
is suitable both for low and high pressure (see Fig. 4). 



5.1.3.1 Cleaning, lubrication and installation of rubber 
ring gasket should be as given in 8.1.7. 

5.1.3.2 The pipe to be connected shall be placed on the 
bed with the sufficient distance from previously joined 
pipe to allow lowering of pipe with the coupling into 
position. Pull the pipe with coupling on to the pre- 
viously laid pipe by means of jack after clamping the 
pipe. 

5.1.3.3 Care shall be taken in the alignment of the 
coupling with pipes. 

5.2 Restrained Pipe Joint 

The restrained type pipe joint is capable of withstand- 
ing internal pressure and longitudinal forces. For pipe 
line consisting of restrained joints only, expansion 
joints shall be provided in consultation with the 
manufacturer of pipe fittings. 

NOTE - Coefficient of thermal expansion for GRP pipes 

may be taken as 30 x 10" 6 mm/°C. 

5.2.1 Spigot and Socket Joint with Glueing 

This joint is suitable for underground applications 
under conditions of normal outside loads and low pres- 
sures. It is easy to make and enables a high laying speed 
to be reached. The glueing is to be done by polyester 
cement or any other adhesive suitable for a hydraulic 
and mechanical seal (see Fig. 5). 

5.22 Spigot and Socket Joint with Glue and Overlay 

This type of joint is suitable both for low and high 
pressure (see Fig. 6). Glueing the joint should be done 
with suitable adhesive and overlay with the same 
material as used in pipe. The minimum thickness of 
overlay shall be 1.5 times of the thickness of pipes. 

5.2.3 Butt Joint 

It is used for running pipes and for the connection of 
straight runs to fittings (reduction, elbows, flanges, etc). 
The minimum thickness of joint '/' shall not be less than 



pv^> ; V^^*^v'^■^ vcr 



im^s>>sw*w su 



s.v^s iv.v.^.^.v, 



f*ff*jt?t?r..f.it. 



^t t/ mmmmu 



Fio. 4 Illustration of Double SocketCoupling Joint 



S 



FOLYSTEft "CEMENT FOR HYDRAULIC 
AND MECHANICAL, SEAL 



>**j»>^yfr^>is^\\\\\\s. 




Fig. 5 Illustration of Spigot and Socket Joint with Glueing 

3 



IS 13916 : 1994 



'i ! , li ; i L l "."; r 7."^ 'i ll T' . T < t >tm 



K K ^^rnm^^Wy^^y 



I 



Sfel ^\>>>>>>>g 




Fig. 6 Illustration of Spigot and Socket Joint with 
Glue and Overlay 

the thickness of pipe. Width of overlay shall not be less 
than ten times the thickness of the pipe on either side 
of the joint. The joint is made with hand lay up method 
(see Fig. 7). 



csEsssfeasS: 



f 1 



1WASV 



«aMmwfefcsre*m«' 



Fig. 7 Illustration of Butt Joint 

5.2.4 Flanged Joint 

The flange joint is used for connecting the valves, 
pumps or any other apparatus or pipes of different 
materials. The flanged joint is made from the same 
material as the pipe ( see Fig. 8 ). 

5.2.5 Steel Collar on GRP Pipe for Flanged Connection 

A steel loose flange is slipped on to a GRP pipe and 
then a hand lay up collar is done. The steel collar 
may now be connected to any flanged connection ( see 
Fig. 9). 



6 EXCAVATION AND PREPARATION OF 
TRENCH 

6.1 Trench Excavation 

6.1.1 Trench Contour 

The surface at the trench grade should be continuous, 
smooth and free of big rocks more than 1 .5 times the 
thickness of the pipe if rounded, or more than 1.0 times 
.the thickness of the pipe if they have sharp edges and 
may cause point loading on the pipe. When ledge rock, 
hardpan, big rocks, timber or other foreign materials are 
to be found, it is advisable to pad the trench bottom with 
sand or compacted fine grained soils at least 15 cm thick 
so as to provide an adequate foundation. 

6.1.2 Trench Width, A 

The width of the trench at top of the pipe should not be 
greater than necessary to provide adequate room for 
joining the pipe in the trench and for compacting the 
backfill in the zone of the pipe at the side thereof. If 
necessary, bell holes are permissible at the joints. 

6.1.3 Trench Depth 

Trench depth should be determined by the intended 
service, properties, size of the pipe and local conditions, 
such as properties of soil and combination of static and 
dynamic loading. It should be ensured that the burial 
depth is sufficient to prevent the conveyed fluids from 
being affected by frost penetration. 

Local, state and other safety regulations/laws should be 
followed. If required, necessary measures should be 
taken to support the trench walls with sufficient 
strength to protect the employees working in the 
trench. 

6.2 Stable Trench Conditions 

Stable trench conditions occur with soils where only 
small displacement is caused by variations in pressure 
(stresses) or moisture content. Such conditions enable 
the trench wall to be made vertical from the bed to top of 
the pipe without the use of shearing or sheet piling (see 
Fig. 10). The slope 'c' atthe top edge of the trench on either 
sides should be provided to avoid caving in of the top soil 
and to facilitate smooth installation of the pipeline. 




FLAT GASKET FOR 
NOM. BORE<1200mm 



RING GASKET FOR 
NOM. BORE>1200mm 

ii'U'tifi 




Fig. 8 Illustration of Flanged Joint 



IS 13916 : 1994 



STEEL 
COLLAR 



FLANGED END 
CONNECTION 




GRP PIPt / 

WITH LAYUP-' 



Ro, 9 Illustration of Steel Collar for Flanged Connection 




63 Unstable Trench Conditions 

6,3.1 This condition exist when the bottom has soft, 
loose, or highly expansive soil. Unstable soil conditions 
occur when soil has less than 1 440 kg/m 2 of cohesion 
as calculated from an unconfined compression test. 
Cohesion for different consistency of soil is given in 
Table 1 for information. 

Table 1 Consistency for Cohesive Soils 






A = 
B = 

C = 



Width of the trench. 



Consistency 

Very soft 
Soft 
Medium 
Stiff 



Pipe zone area Filled with sound granular soil to a Ver y stiff 
minimum of 300 mm above the top of the pipe, Hard 



Cohesion in kg/m from 
Unconfined Compression 
Test 

1220 

1 220-1 440 

1 440-4 880 

4 880-9 765 

9 765-19 530 

19 530 



S = 



Secondary backfill, having minimum depth as 
(D-300) mm to avoid floatation and should be en- 
cased appropriately in RCC pipe or with RCCslab 
when impact load/vibration of vehicular traffic or 
otherwise is anticipated. 

Should be as per the following values: 

PipeDia S 

mm 

200 to 500 200 

600 to 900 300 

1 000 to 1 600 450 

Above 1 600 600 



F = Bedding (15 cm) minimum. 

Fig. 10 Installation in Stable Soils - Method of 
Trench Construction 



6.3.2 The bottom of the trench and its sides must be 
stabilized before laying the pipeline. This can be ac- 
complished (see Fig. 11 and Fig. 12) by lowering the 
water table at least 25 cm below the elevation of the 
invert with well points, shoring or sheet piling the sides 
or by over excavating the bottom and sides of the trench 
and replacing them with a mixture of sand and coarse 
gravel or crushed stone or a combination of the above 
method*. 

6.4 Trench Dewatering 

Ideally the water level should be kept below the pipe 
invert for the installation to proceed normally. In con- 
ditions when the water level is high, the usual and most 
economical method of laying pipes is as follows: 



IS 13916 : 1994 



a) Open enough trench to lay one or two lengths of 
pipe and then backfil; 

b) Remove the ground water by starting construc- 
tion at the outlet and placing the pipe upstream, 
water will drain through the pipe in this stream; 

c) If the pipe has to be laid from the inlet down 
stream, the water may have to be pumped to the 
surface of the ground at the top of the trench for 
disposal; and 

d) Do not rum off the dewatering system until 
sufficient cover depth has been reached to 
prevent the pipe floatation. 

7 BEDDING, BACKFILLING AND COMPACTION 

7.1 Bedding 

7.1.1 The pipe should be uniformly and continuously 
supported through its whole length with firm stable 
bedding material. Pipe bedding material should be sand 
or gravel as per the requirements on the backfill 
material ( see 3.6 ). 

7.1.2 The bedding should be placed so as to give 
complete contact between the bottom of the trench and 
the pipe and should be compacted to provide a mini- 
mum compaction corresponding to 90% maximum dry 
density [ see IS 2720 ( Part 7 ) : 1980 ]. 

7.1.3 If the pipe is supported on grade elevation with 
use of timber or of tapered wedges, they must be 
removed and not left in place. They can usually be 
pulled out after the bedding has been compacted to the 
specified minimum compaction. The voids from which 
the timber has been removed must be properly filled 
and compacted. 



7.2 Back Filling 

7.2.1 Back filling should be placed in layers not ex- 
ceeding a depth per layer which can be compacted to a 
minimum of 85% maximum dry density [ see IS 2720 
( Part 7 ) : 1980 ]. Lift should normally not be greater 
than 30 cm in height and the height differential on each 
side of the pipe should be limited to this amount so as 
to prevent lateral movement of the pipe. 

7.2.2 Most coarse grained soil are acceptable. This may 
comprise of gravel or sand. However, silty sand, clayey 
sand, silty and clayey gravel shall not be used unless 
proposed to be used in conjunction with gravel or clean 
sand. 

7.2.3 It is very important that the pipe zone backfill 
material does not wash away or migrate into the native 
soil. Likewise, potential migration of the native soil into 
the pipe zone backfill must also be prevented. 

7.2.4 Heavy earth moving equipment used for backfill- 
ing should not be brought until the minimum cover over 
the pipe is 90 cm in the case of wide tracked bulldozers 
or 120 cm in the case of wheeled roaders or roller 
compactors. 

7.3 Compaction 

Vibratory methods are preferably for compaction. 
Compaction within distances of 15 cm to 45 cm from 
the pipe is usually done with hand tempers. 

8LAYINGOFPD7E 

8.1 Laying should take place only after the trench and 
the surface supporting the pipes have been prepared 
according to this specification. 



SHPRING/ SHEET PILING 1 




%gPTO^! 



E « Foundation (if required), 15 cm minimum 
NOTE - A, B, C, Fand S are as explained in Fig. 10- 



Fig. 11 Method of Trench Construction for Unstable Soil Conditions — Alternative 1 




IS 13916 : 1994 



NOTE - Notations are as explained in Fig. 11 except 5=1 Diameter (Min) 
Fig. 1 2 Method of Trench Construction for Unstable Soil Conditions - Alternative 2 



8.2 For a coupling type of joint, two rubber ring gaskets 
are first fixed into the groove inside the coupling and 
then the coupling is to be fixed at the coupling area of 
the pipe and pipe is to be lowered in the trench. 

8.3 Before placing a pipe in the trench, it is necessary 
to clean any remains of earth, sand or mud from the 
inside of the socket and from the opposite end bearing 
the rubber ring gasket/packing. When cleaning has 
taken place, run a hand around inside the socket to 
ensure that there are no residues of hardened resin 
which can be removed readily with a chisel. It is also 
necessary to check that the groove has an even depth 
and has not been damaged for instance, during carriage 
of handling. 

8.4 Place the pipe in the trench, taking care to dig a 
small hollow at each end so that the groove and the 
socket are well separated from the sand and gravels in 
the bottom of the trench. 

8.5 Anchor the first pipe section laid according to the 
method described and leave its ends free along a space 
enough for insertion of the next section and for check- 
ing. 

Place the next pipe section in the trench and leave 
enough space for the operator to be free to move and to 
work between the two pipe sections so as to carry out 
the cleaning and checking operations (see Fig. 13). 

8.6 Clean the coupling area of the joint once more with 
a cloth and also clean the flared portion of the lead-in 
using suitable lubricant. 

8.7 Clean the groove again, take the rubber ring gasket 
and lubricate it by running it between the hands and 
checking at the same time, it being in good condition. 
It should be ensured that every portion of the ring or 
inside of the socket must not lacks lubricant as it will 
impair good insertion of the. pipe. 

8.8 For socket and spigot type of joint, pass the rubber 
ring under the pipe until it settles into the groove, then 
pull it forcibly upwards and follow the ring with the 
hands so that three quarters of it is positioned in the 
groove, then lift the ring above the upper generating 
line of the pipe forcibly and then release it so that it falls 



into the groove thus being freed of any twists. 

8.8.1 Run the hands around the pipe to check that the 
whole of the packing is in its seating and, in the case of 
large diameter pipes, smear lubricant again above the 
inserted rubber ring gasket/packing (see Fig. 14). 

8.8.2 Align and bring together the two pipe sections 
until rubber ring touches the flared portion of the 
lead-in. 

When this has taken place, examine the position of the 
ring and above all, ensure that there are no sand or other 
foreign bodies present. 

8.8.3 Fit the socket onto the spigot very slowly, ''.we"- 
ing hajfway along the coupling area, and check the 
position of the packing visually. 

8.8.4 Proceed with the joint until the socket is halted 
by the abutment ledge. The next pipe section should not 
be fitted until the previous pipe section has been 
anchored with an overlay of sand. 

8.9 Check the rubber ring gasket/packing after the joint 
has been coupled. This check must always be carried 
out and is performed with a blade of steel or of another 
metal having a thickness of 0.4/0.5 mm, a width of 
15 mm and any length greater than 200 mm, the blade 
being inserted into the annular space between the sock- 
et and the spigot. 

This check should be conducted along all the circum- 
ference where the packing is compressed so as to ensure 
that the rubber ring has a homogeneous depth and is 
therefore correctly positioned in its seating. If the ring 
is found to be seated differently at one point than other 
points or if there is any doubt, disconnect the joint, 
check the rubber ring and replace it if it shows any 
permanent signs of faulty seating, check once more the 
coupling area of the joint, the flared lead-in of the 
socket and the groove on the spigot When re-inserting 
the pipe section, take extra care to align the pipes 
perfectiy. When uncoupling pipe sections, never use 
chains or steel cables in direct contact with the pipes. 

Check once again the position of the ring with the 
blade. « 



IS 13916: 1994 



30cm.mln 

1 




Fig. 13 Laying of Pipe 



8.10 Misalignment of the Joint 

When for reasons of the lay-out of the line the joint has 
to be misaligned (but such misalignment must remain 
within the limits provided by the supplier of the pipes), 
such misalignment at the predetermined angle should be 
applied only after having inserted the pipe and the joint is 
thoroughly checked for its watertightness (see 9 ). 

8.11 Lowering of Pipes 

Pipes should be lowered in the trench with appropriate 
mechanical means like chain pulley block, excavators, 
etc. 

8.12 Thrust Block 

RCC thrust block should be provided at bends and at 



places of reduction in cross section to take care of 
thrust. 

9 HYDROSTATIC TESTS 

9.1 Completed pipe in joints shall be hydrostatically 
tested for leakage as given in 9.2 prior to acceptance 
and service. It shall be done regularly as installation 
proceeds. Installation should never exceed testing by 
more than 1 km. 

9.2 Leak detection testing shall be carried out at a test 
pressure corresponding to 1.5 times the pressure class 
of the pipe/fittings. The test pressure shall be main- 
tained for a period of 24 hours. Each full length pipe 
section, fittings and joint shall be leak tight. 



@ 




Fig. 14 Fixing of Rubber Gasket on Spigot 



IS 13916 : 1994 



ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 

COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 

Plastic Pipes and Fittings Sectional Committee, CED 50 



Chairman 
Shri K. Prabhakra Rao 

Members 

Shri Gulam Ahmed 

Shri S. S. Bhandari 

Chief Engineer (PPR&D) 

Materials Manager ( Alternate ) 

Chief Engineer (Designs) 

Superintending Engineer (S&S) {Alternate ) 

Shri R. C. Choudhry 

Shri M. S. Datt 

Shri N.N. Shah ( Alternate ) 

Deputy Chief Engineer 

Shri A. G. Dhongde 

Director (Materials Management) 
Superintending Engineer (Designs) {Alternate ) 

Shri R. B. Doctor 
Shri R. A. Patel {Alternate ) 

Enginfering Director 
Chief ENGINEER (Western Region) {Alternate ) 

ExECimve Director 

Hydraulic Engineer 

Deputy Hydraulic Engineer (A Iternate ) 

Shri M. S. Idnani 

Shri C. P. Sathe ( Alternate ) 

Shri V. K. Jain 

Shri M. K. M. Joshi {Alternate ) 

Shri K. L. Khanna 

Shri Vinayak V. Shembekar( A ftemate) 

Shri G. K. Lalchandani 
Dr A. P. Das ( A Iternate ) 

Shri William Mendonea 

Shri H. D. Yadav ( Alternate ) 

Lt Col L. P. Dasika 
Shri R. N. Sinha, AEE {Alternate ) 

Shri K. P. Nanavaty 

Dr Y. N. Sharma {Alternate ) 

Dr R. Parmasjvam 

Shrimati S. S. Dhage {Alternate ) 

Dr S. M. Patel 
Dr M. K. Pandey( A Iternate ) 

ShriS. Prakash 
Chief Engineer (C) {Alternate ) 

Shri Rajendra Prasad 
Shri Jay Kumar {Alternate) 



Representing 
Engineer-in-chief *s Branch (Ministry of Defence), New Delhi 

Public Health Engineering Zone, Government of Kamataka 
Wavin India Ltd, Ghaziabad 
U. P. Jal Nigam, Lucknow 

Directorate General of Works, Central Public Works Department, 
New Delhi 

Office of the Chief Engineer, Public Health, Orissa, Bhubaneshwar 
Polyolefins Industries Ltd, Bombay 

Public Health Engineering Department, Government of Kerala, 

Trivandrum 
National Buildings Organization (Ministry of Works & Housing) 
Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi 

Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation, Ahmedabad 

Tamil Nadu Water Supply & Drainage Board, Madras 

PVC Pipe Development Organization, New Delhi 
Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay, Bombay 

Garware Plastics & Polyester Ltd, Bombay 

Public Health Engineering Department, Government of Rajasthan, Jaipur 

EPC Industries Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Central Institute of Plastics Engineering & Technology, Madras 

The Supreme Industries Ltd, Bombay 

Ministry of Defence, New Delhi 

Reliance Industries Ltd, Bombay 

National Environmental Engineering Research Institute (CSIR), Nagpur 

Institute of Co-operative Management, Ahmedabad 

Delhi Municipal Corporation, Delhi 

Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, New Delhi 

( Continued ojipage 10 ) 



IS 13916 : 1994 

( Continued from page ) 

Members 
Shri P. S. Rajvanshi 

Shri M. S. Narayanan {Alternate ) 

Dr P. S. Rana 

Shrj K. Subramaniam ( Alternate ) 

Shri O. P. Ratra 

Dr Dhananjay Rav 

Shrj B. B. Manwadekar (Alternate ) 

Reprsentative 

Shri Sudesh Kumar Sharma ( Alternate ) 

Dr D. K. Sanyal 

Shri A. K. Biswas ( Alternate ) 

Shri C. K. Sharma 

Shrimati Seema Vaidya 

Shri A. Samanta {Alternate ) 

Dr B. Vaidyanathan 

Shri J. Venkataraman, 
Director & Head ( Civ Engg ) 



Representing 

Central Public Health & Environment Engineering Organization, 
(Ministry of Works & Housing) 

Housin." & Urban Develonment Corporation lid, New Delhi 

Building Materials & Technology Promotion Council (Ministry of 
Urban Development), New Delhi 

Finolex Pipes Ltd, Pune 

Central Building Research Institute (CSIR), Roorkee 

Calcutta Municipal Corporation, Calcutta 

RITES, New Delhi 

Graphite Vicarh India Ltd, Nasik 

Jain Brother Industries, Jalgaon 

Director General, BIS ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Secretary 

Shri S. S. Sethi 
Director (Civ Engg), BIS 



Pane! for GRP Pipes and Fittings, CED 50 : Pi 



Convener 

Shri O. P. Ratra 

Members 

DrM. S. Alam 

Shri A. J. Bajaj 

Dr L. K. Behi. 

Shri D. D. Behl ( Alternate ) 

Shri Sham Sunder Chabria 

Shri S. Prakash 

Shri D, P. Goyal 

Shrimati Seema Vaidya 

Shri A. Samanta (Alternate ) 



Building Materials & Technology Promotion Council, New Delhi 

Industrial Toxicology Research Centre, Luck now 
Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, New Delhi 
Hind Protective Coating Ltd, New Delhi 

Lalit Polymers & Electronics, Bombay 

Delhi Water Supply and Sewage Disposal Undertaking, New Delhi 

Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 

Graphite Vicarb India Ltd, Nasik 



10 



Brueau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any 
form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course 
of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade 
designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also 
reviewed periodically; a standaid along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that 
no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. 
Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or 
edition. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. CED 50 ( 4736 ). 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters: 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 ( Common to all offices ) 

Regional Offices : Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 331 01 31 

NEW DELHI 110002 { 331 13 75 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola ( 37 84 99, 37 85 61 

CALCUTTA 700054 { 37 86 26, 37 86 62 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 f 53 38 43, 53 16 40 

( 53 23 84 

Southern ; C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 f 235 02 16, 235 04 42 

| 235 15 19, 235 23 15 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) ( 632 92 95, 632 78 58 

BOMBAY 400093 j 632 78 91, 632 78 92 

Branches : AHMAD ABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 

COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. 
JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Frinted at New India Printing Press, Khurja. India 



