**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 14971 (2001) : Polycorbonate Resins for its Safe use in 
Contact with Foodstuffs, Pharmaceuticals and Drinking Water 
[PCD 12: Plastics] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 14971 :2001 

Indian Standard 

POLYCARBONATE RESINS FOR ITS SAFE USE IN 

CONTACT WITH FOODSTUFFS, PHARMACEUTICALS 

AND DRINKING WATER— SPECIFICATION 



ICS 67.250; 83.080.20 



© BIS 2001 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



A ugust 200 1 Price G roup 4 



Plastics Sectional Committee, PCD 12 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Plastics 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Petroleum, Coal and Related Products Division Council. 

Polycarbonate finds wide use in food contact and health care applications. Some of the most important and 
known applications of polycarbonate in this area are infant feeding bottles, drinking water containers, micro- 
ovenable food containers, blood oxygenator, dialyser tubes, intravenous stopcocks, etc. High molecular weight 
polycarbonate is inert and essentially insoluble in the components of food, water or body fluid with which it 
comes in contact in the above applications and in itself does not pose any toxic hazard. It is, however, possible 
that some transfer will occur of polymer additives, adventitious impurities such as monomers, residual catalysts 
and solvents and low molecular weight polymer fractions from bulk of polycarbonate into the food, water or 
body fluid with consequent toxic hazard to the user. The occurrence of acute toxicity due to polycarbonate in 
contact with food, water or body fluid is most unlikely, since only trace quantities of potendally toxic materials 
are likely to migrate. However, the accumulation of these potentially toxic materials with time may lead to 
hazards which may be serious. 

Polycarbonate resins are considered as safe for use as articles or components of articles intended for use in 
producing, manufacturing, packing, processing, preparing, treating, packaging, transporting or holding food 
in accordance with US.FDA Regulation 21 CFR 177.1580 and of the Regulations of several other countries like 
Germany. 

This standard is intended to be used with the series of Indian Standards on plastics for food contact application 
given in Annex A. 

It is emphasized that these Standards need to be used in combination to provide a system of control to the 
manufacturers and suppliers as well as the processors and users of Polycarbonate materials to derive maximum 
benefits. Besides, it may also serve as basis for official agencies to frame suitable legislation to ensure effective 
safeguard for the safety and health of consumers where polycarbonate in food contact and related applications 
are concerned. 

The composition of the committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given in Annex C. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : I960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)'. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



IS 14971 : 2001 



Indian Standard 

POLYCARBONATE RESINS FOR ITS SAFE USE IN 

CONTACT WITH FOODSTUFFS, PHARMACEUTICALS 

AND DRINKING WATER — SPECIFICATION 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard specifies the requirements and 
methods of sampling and test for polycarbonate resins 
for the manufacture of items used in contact with 
foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and drinking water. 

1.2 This standard does not purport to establish 
suitability of polycarbonate in contact with particular 
foodstuff, pharmaceutical or drinking water, from 
other than toxicological considerations. 

2 REFERENCES 

The following standards contain provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 



IS No. 
4905 : 1968 
9833 : 1981 



9845 : 1998 



14972 : 2001 



Title 
Methods of random sampling 
List of pigments and colourants for 
use in plastics in contact with 
foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water 

Determination of overall migration 
of constituents of plastics materials 
and articles intended to come in 
contact with foodstuffs — Methods 
of analysis {second revision) 
Positive list of constituents of 
polycarbonate resins in contact with 
foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water 



3 TERMINOLOGY 
3.1 Polycarbonate 

A basic resin produced by condensation 
polymerization of bis-phenol-A either along or in 
combination with other bis-phenols with phosgene and 
co-condensation polymerization products of the above 
combination with phthalic acid dichlorides. 

4 REQUIREMENTS 
4.1 Basic Resin 

Shall be polycarbonate materials as defined in 3.1 and 



their blends in any mixing proportions. 

4.2 Material 

The material shall also comply with the threshold 
limits of the manufacturing residues, polymerization 
ingredients and auxiliary items as prescribed in 
IS 14972. - 

4.3 Pigments and Colourants 

In case the coloured material is used for food packaging 
applications it shall comply with the list and limits of 
the pigments and colourants prescribed in IS 9833. 

4.4 Overall Migration 

The material shall also comply with the overall 
migration limits to 60 mg/l, Max of the simulant and 
10 mg/dm^, Max of the surface of the material or 
article, when tested by the method prescribed in 
IS 9845. 

4.5 Storage and Control 

4.5.1 Storage 

Polycarbonate materials intended for food contact use 
shall be stored separately from other materials in 
closed, properly identified containers. 

4.5.2 Control 

An authorized person shall supervise and control the 
issue of polycarbonate materials to the process or 
manufacturing area and shall maintain appropriate 
written records of the issue of such materials. 

4.5.3 Adequate standards of hygiene shall be 
maintained at all times and plant operators and store 
men shall be trained in proper hygiene practices. 

5 PACKING AND MARKING 

5.1 Packing 

The material shall be packed in suitable plastic or 
paper bags, as agreed between the purchaser and the 
supplier, in a manner so as to ensure that the items do 
not become contaminated during storage. 

5.2 Marking 

5.2.1 Each packages shall be clearly marked with the 
following: 



IS 14971 :2001 



a) Name and type of the material; 

b) Indication of the source of manufacture and 
recognized trade-mark, if any; 

c) Date of manufacture; 

d) Batch No, or Code No.; and 

e) "Food-grade" material. 

5.2.2 The packages shall also carry the symbol 
(see Fig. 1) clearly embossed/printed on it (in 
accordance with the EEC Directive 80/590/EEC 
'Symbol' that shall accompany materials and articles 
intended to come into contact with foodstuffs): 

5.2.3 BIS Certification Marking 

The package may also be marked with the Standard 
Mark. 

5.2.3.1 The use of the Standard Mark is governed by 
the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 
1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. 
Details of conditions under which a licence for the 
use of Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers 




Fig. 1 Symbol 

or producers, may be obtained from the Bureau of 
Indian Standards. 

6 SAMPLING 

The method of drawing representative sample of the 
material and the criteria for conformity shall be as 
prescribed in Annex B. 



ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 

LIST OF INDIAN STANDARDS ON PLASTICS SUITABLE FOR USE IN CONTACT WITH 
FOODSTUFFS, PHARMACEUTICALS AND DRINKING WATER 



IS No. Title 

9833 : 1981 List of pigments and colourants for 

use in plastics in contact with 
foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water 

9845 : 1998 Determination of overall migration 

of constituents of plastics materials 
and articles intended to come into 
contact with foodstuffs — Methods 
of analysis {second revision) 

10141 : 1982 Positive list of constituents of 

polyethylene in contact with food- 
stuffs, pharmaceuticals and drinking 
water (first revision) 

10142 : 1982 Polystyrene (crystal and high im- 

pact) for its safe use in contact with 
foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water (first revision) 
10146 : 1982 Polyethylene for its safe use in 
contact with foodstuffs, pharma- 



IS No. Title 

ceuticals and drinking water 

10148 : 1982 Positive list of constituents of 
polyvinyl chloride (PVC) and its 
copolymers in contact with food- 
stuffs, pharmaceuticals and drinking 
water 

10149: 1982 Positive list of constituents of 
polystyrene (crystal and high impact) 
in contact with foodstuffs, pharma- 
ceuticals and drinking water 
(Amendment No. 1) 

10151 : 1982 Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) and its 
copolymers for its safe use in contact 
with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water 

10171 : 1999 Guide on suitability of plastics for 
food packaging (second revision) 

10909: 1984 Positive list of constituents of 
polypropylene and its copolymers in 



IS 14971 : 2001 



IS No. Title 

contact with foodstuffs, pharma- 
ceuticals and drinking water (first 
revision) 
10910 : 1984 Polypropylene and its copolymers for 
its safe use in contact with foodstuffs, 
pharmaceuticals and drinking water 

11434 : 1985 lonomers resins for its safe use in 

contact with foodstuffs, pharma- 
ceuticals and drinking water 

11435 : 1985 Positive list of constituents of 

ionomer resins for its safe use in 
contact with foodstuffs, pharma- 
ceuticals and drinking water 

11 704 : 1 986 Ethylene/acrylic acid (EAA) copoly- 

mers for its safe use in contact with 
foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water 

11705 : 1986 Positive list of constituents of 

Ethylene/acrylic acid (EAA) copoly- 
mers for their safe use in contact with 
foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water 

12229 : 1987 Positive list of constituents of 
polyalkylene terephthalates (PET & 
PBT) for their safe use in contact 
with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water 

12247 : 1988 Nylon-6 polymer for its safe use in 
contact with foodstuffs, pharma- 
ceuticals and drinking water 



ISNa Title 

12248: 1988 Positive list of constituents of 
Nylon-6 polymer for its safe use in 
contact with foodstuffs, pharma- 
ceuticals and drinking water 

12252 : 1987 Polyalkylene terephthalates (PET & 
PBT) for their safe use in contact 
with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water 

13449 : 1992 Positive list of constituents of 
ethylene vinyl acetate (EVA) copoly- 
mers in contact with foodstuffs, 
pharmaceuticals and drinking water 

13576 : 1992 Ethylene methacrylic and (EMAA) 

copolymers and terpolymers for their 
safe use in contact with foodstuffs, 
pharmaceuticals and drinking water 

13577 : 1992 Positive list of constituents of 

ethylene methacrylic (EMAA) co- 
polymers and terpolymers in contact 
with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water 

13601 : 1993 Ethylene vinyl acetate (EVA) 
copolymers for its safe use in contact 
with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water 

14972:2001 Positive list of constituents of 
polycarbonate resins in contact with 
foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and 
drinking water 



ANNEX B 

(Clause 6) 

SAMPLING OF POLYCARBONATE 



B-1 GENERAL 

B-l.l In drawing, preparing, storing and handling 
samples, the following precautions and directions shall 
be observed. 

B-L2 Samples shall not be taken in an exposed place. 

B-L3 The sampling instrument, wherever applicable, 
shall be made of stainless steel or any other suitable 
material on which the material shall have no action. 
The instrument shall be clean and dry. 

B-1 ,4 Precautions shalKbe taken to protect the samples, 
the material being sampled, the sampling instrument 
and the containers for samples from adventitious 
contamination. 



B-L5 The samples shall be placed in suitable, clean, 
dry, air-tight metal or glass containers on which the 
material has no action. The sample containers shall 
be of such a size that they are almost completely filled 
by the sample. 

B-L6 Each sample container shall be sealed air-tight 
with a stopper after filling and marked with full details 
of sampling, such as, the date of sampling, the month 
and year of manufacture of the material, etc. 

B-L7 Samples shall be stored in such a manner that 
the temperature of the material does not vary unduly 
from the normal temperature. 



IS 14971 : 2001 



B-2 SCALE OF SAMPLING 

B-2.1 Lot 

In a single consignment all the packages of the same 
class, same type, same form and belonging to the same 
batch of manufacture shall be grouped together to 
constitute a lot. If a consignment is known to consist 
of packages belonging to different batches of 
manufacture or different forms, the packages 
belonging to the same batch or manufacture and same 
form shall be grouped together and each such group 
shall constitute a lot. 

B-2.2 For ascertaining the conformity of the material 
to the requirements of this specification, samples shall 
be tested from each lot separately. The number of 
packages to be sampled shall depend on the size of 
the lot and shall be in accordance with col 1 and 2 of 
Table 1. 

B-2.2. 1 These packages shall be selected at random 
from the lot and in order to ensure the randomness of 
selection, procedure given in IS 4905 may be followed. 

B-3 PREPARATION OF TEST SAMPLES 

B-3.1 From each of the packages of the material 
selected, small portions of material shall be drawn with 
the help of a suitable sampling instrument. The total 
quantity of material collected from each package shall 
be sufficient to test all the requirement given in 4. 



Table 1 Scale of Sampling 

(Clause B-2.2) 



Number of Packages 
in the Lot 


Sample Size 




(1) 


(2) 




Up to 15 


2 




16 to 50 


3 




51 to 100 


4 




101 to 300 


5 




301 to 500 


6 




501 to 1 000 


8 




I 001 and above 


10 




NOTE — When the number of packages in the lot is less than 
three, all the packages shall be sampled. 



B-3.2 In the case of packages consisting of containers, 
vials, rolls or films, the number of items to be selected 
from a package, for testing each of the requirements 
given in 4, shall be one. 

B-4 NUMBER OF TESTS 

Tests for determining all the requirements given in 4 
shall be carried out on the individual test samples. 

B-5 CRITERIA FOR CONFORMITY 

The lot shall be declared as conforming to the 
requirements of this specification if all the test results 
on individual samples meet the relevant specification 
requirements. 



IS 14971 : 2001 



ANNEX C 

(Foreword) 

COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 

Plastics Sectional Committee, PCD 12 



Organization 

Internet Exchange Next.com Limited, Mumbai 
Amines and Plasticizers Ltd, Mumbai 

Bakelite Hylam Ltd, Hyderabad 

Building Materials and Technology Promotion Council, New Delhi 
Central Institute of Plastics Engineering and Technology, Chennai 

Central Food Technological Research Institute, Mysore 

Gas Authority of India Ltd, Noida 

Gharda Chemcials Ltd, Thane 

GE Plastics India Limited, Gurgaon 

Gujarat State Fertilizers Company Limited, Vadodara 

Haldia Petrochemicals Ltd, Kolkata 

Hindustan Polymers Ltd, Mumbai 

Indian Centre for Plastics in Environment, Mumbai 
Indian Petrochemicals Corporation Limited, Vadodara 

Indian Plastics Institute, Mumbai 

Indian Institute of Packaging, Mumbai 

Indian Toxicological Research Centre, Lucknow 
Jain Irrigation Systems Ltd, Jalgaon 

Larsen & Toubro Ltd, Mumbai 

Ministry of Defence (R&D), Kanpur 

Ministry of Defence, RDSO, Lucknow 

Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, DGHS,New Delhi 

Ministry of Food Processing Industries, New Delhi 
National Chemical Laboratory, Pune 

National Dairy Development Board, Anand 



Representative(s) 
SuRi Sarup Chowdhary {Chairman) 

ShRI V. V. RULKARNI 

Dr R. V. Utekar {Alternate) 
Dr C. S. Narasimhan 

Dr M. Balakrishnan {Alternate) 

Shri J. Sengupta 
Dr Vijai Kumar 

Dr K. Palanivelu {Alternate) 

Shri S. K. Kumar 

Shri Baldev Raj {Alternate) . 
Shri Shivaji Basu 

Shri V. K. Singh (Alternate I) 

Shri Manish Khandelwal {Alternate II) 
DrB.K. Desai 

Dr U. M. Vakil {Alternate) 
General Manager 

Dr Rashmi Bhardwaj {Alternate) 
Shri B. D. Adhvaryu 

Dr Y. p. Singh {Alternate) 
Shri Shankar Banerjee 

Shri Amttava Sanyal {Alternate) 
Shri S. V. Parveen 

Shri N. C. Dhocendranath {Alternate) 
Dr a. N. Bhat 
Shri J. B. Kamat 

Shri V. C. Francis {Alternate) 
Shri D. R. Patel 

Shri R, K. Aggarwal {Alternate) 
Shri P. V. Narayanan 

DrN. G. Mokashi {Alternate) 
DrV. p. Sharma 
Dr H. C. Mruthyunjaya 

Shri S. B. Josm {Alternate I) 

Shri A. P. Choudhari {Alternate II) 
Shri V. Mohan 

Shri R. Suba Rao {Alternate) 
Shri M. N. Saraf 

Dr L. D. Khandpal {Alternate) 
Joint Director (Rubber) 

Director (SS) {Alternate) 
Addl Director General (PFA) 

Shri Sundar Lal {Alternate) 
Shri O. P. Gera 
Dr S. S. Mahajan 

Dr S . S . KuLKARNi {Alternate) 

Dr R. S. Lathana 

Shri S. K. Khandelwal {Alternate) 



{Continued on page 6) 



IS 14971 : 2001 



{Continued from page 5) 

Organization 
National Organic Chemical Industries Ltd, Mumbai 

Nuchem Ltd, Faridabad 
Permali Wallace Ltd, Bhopal 

Reliance Industries Ltd, Mumbai 

Saint-Gobain Vetrotex India Ltd, Hyderabad 

Shivalik Agro-Poly Products Ltd, Parwanoo, H.P. 

Shriram Fertilizers & Chemcials, Kota 

Shriram Institute for Industrial Research, Delhi 
Supreme Petrochem Ltd, Mumbai 

The All India Plastics Manufacturers Association, Mumbai 

Tata Engg & Locomotive Co Ltd, Jamshedpur 

The Plastics & Linoleums Export Promotion Council, Mumbai 
VIP Industries, Mumbai 

XPRO India Ltd, Faridabad 

BIS Directorate General 



Representative (s) 

ShriV.K.Sharma 

Shri J. K. Vadodaria {Alternate) 

Dr R. M. Mehta 
Shri C. C. Sakarda 

Shri S. K. Kodesia {Alternate) 
Dr Y. B. Vasudeo 

Dr K. S. Jadhav {Alternate) 
Shri S. Siwdaram 

Shri S. K. Ghosh {Alternate I) 

Dr B. J. C. Basu {Alternate II) 
Shri Arun Anand 

Shri Yog Raj Kapur {A Itemate) 
Shri M. S, Tripathi 

Shri R, C. Gupta {Alternate) 
Dr R, C. Sood 
Shri R. Rangarajan 

Shri B. A. Rakhangi {Alternate) 

Shri R. K. Aggarwal 

Shri K. B. Easwaran {Alternate) 
Shri U. K. Nath 

Shrimati a. D. Sathe {Alternate) 
Shri R. P. Kalyanpur 
Shri Siddhartha Roy 

Shri A. S. Dalve {Alternate) 
Shri C. Bhaskar 

Shri Manmohan Krishan {Alternate) 
Shri Anjan Kar, 

Director & Head (PCD) 
[Representing Director General {Ex-officio Member)] 



Member-Secretary 

ShriT.Kalaivanan 

Joint Director (PCD), BIS 

Plastics in Food Packaging and Allied Industries Subcommittee, PCD 12:12 



Central Food Technological Research Institute, Mysore 
All India Plastic Industries Association, Delhi 
AS & T India Limited, New Delhi 
Bakelite Hylam Ltd, Mumbai 

Britannia Industries Ltd, Bangalore 

Centre for Processed Food, Bangalore 

Central Committee for Food Standards (Directorate General 

of Health Services) 
Central Food Laboratory, Kolkata 

Defence Food Research Laboratory, Mysore 

Drugs Controller (India), New Delhi 



Shri K. R. Kumar {Convener) 
Shri Ravi Kumar 
Shri G. D. Agrawal 
Dr C. Sha>4kar 

Shri S. N. Murthy {Alternate) 
Shri G. S. Aurora 

Shri M. R. Sundar {Alternate) 
Shri R. Prakash 

Shri Chetan L. Hanchate {Alternate) 
The Assistantt Director General (PFA) 

Dr K. C. Guha 

Dr S. Vanchinathan {Alternate) 
Shri Anil Agarwal 

Shri A. N. Srivastava {Alternate) 
Dr P. Das Gupta 



{Continued on page 7) 



{Continued from page 6) 

Organization 

GE Plastics India Ltd, Distt Vadodara 

Gujarat State Fertilizers Company Limited, Vadodara 

Haldia Petrochemicals Ltd, Kolkata 

Hindustan Lever Ltd, Mumbai 

Hitkari Potteries Ltd, New Delhi 
Indian Institute of Packaging, Mumbai 

Indian Petrochemicals Corporation Limited, Vadodara 

Indian Toxicological Research Centre, Lucknow 
National Dairy Development Board, Anand 
National Organic Chemicals Industries Ltd, Mumbai 

Reliance Industries Ltd, Mumbai 

Rollantainers Ltd, Faridabad 
Sriram Fertilizers & Chemicals, Kota 

Supreme Petrochem Ltd, Mumbai 

XPRO India, Faridabad 



IS 14971 : 2001 



Representative (s) 



DrG. Mukhopadhyaya 

Dr Rashmi Bhardwaj {Alternate) 
Shrj B. D. Adhvaryu 

Dr Y. p. Singh {Alternate) 
Shri Amitava Sanyal 

Shri Raj Datta (Alternate) 
Shri M. K. Lahiri 

Shri P. S. Lakshmanan {Alternate) 
Shri Milind Bhole 
Ms M. C. Dordi 

Shri N, C. Saha {Alternate) 
Shri J. B. Kamat 

Shri V. C. Francis {Alternate) 
Dr p. K. Seth 
Sr Executive 
Shri J. K. Vadodaria 

Shri V. K. Sharma {Alternate) 
Dr K. S. Jadhav 

Dr R. Rangaprasad (Alternate) 
Shri Sanjaya Varma 
Shri M. S. Tripathi 

Shri R. C. Gupta (Alternate) 
Shri R. Rangarajan 

Shri B. A. Rakhangi (Alternate) 
Shri Pankaj Mithel 

Shri Vineet Gupta (Alternate) 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of stardardization, marking and quality certification of goods and 
attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publication), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue 
of 'BIS Handbook' and 'Standards: Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc: No. PCD 12 (1329). 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10002 
Telephones: 323 01 31, 323 3375, 323 94 02 

Regional Offices; 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi 
CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 
Southern : Ci.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 6001 13 



Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 
MUMBAI 400093 

Branches : AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 
COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
NALAGARH, PAT^JA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Telegrams: Manaksanstha 
(Common to all offices) 

Telephone 

323 76 17,323 38 41 



r337 84 99,337 85 61 
1337 86 26,337 9120 



{ 



60 38 43 
60 20 25 
(-254 12 16,254 14 42 
1254 25 19,254 13 15 

r832 92 95, 832 78 58 
1832 78 91,832 78 92 



Printed at Simco Printing Press, Delhi 



