*••••••••••*•••• 


-k  t^^ 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live" 


IS  9973  (1981) :  Specification  for  visor  for  scooter  helmets 
[CED  22:  Fire  Fighting] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
"Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New" 


gyiaf/f/raa^^^:^^ 


S?St^  *  I  |>&B5^«%^Na«^ 


\\V^:5^< 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


ic 


j^- 


A 


BLANK  PAGE 


^<*i^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


IS  :  9971  -  \n\ 

( Reaffirmed  2003 ) 


Indian  Standard 


SPECIFICATION  FOR 
VISOR  FOR  SCOOTER  HELMETS 


UDC  6H'891'1  :  6M893'63  !629'M8  68 


©    Copjj/right  1982 

INDIAN    STANDAHDS    INSTTTT'TTON 

MANAK   BHAVAN,    9    BAHADUR   SHAH   ZA>AK     MA  KG 

NEW    DLLKl     U\m2 

Price  Rs    itKt  Jutj/  1982 


IS  :  9973  -  1981 

Indian  Standard 

SPECIFICATION  FOR 
VISOR  FOR  SCOOTER  HELMETS 

Composition  of  Fire  Fighting  Sectional  Committee,  BDC  22 

Chairman  Representing 

SiiRi  G.  B.  Menon  Ministry  of  Home  Affairs 

Member 

Shri  Maiiesh  G.  Agarawal  Brijbasi  Udyog,  Mathura  (  U.P.  ) 

Shri  p.  S.  Banerjee  (  Alternate  ) 
Assistant  Security  Officer  (  Fire  ),  Ministry  of  Railways 

Northern  Railway 
Shri  S.  R.  Bansal  Steel    Authority    of    India    ( Bokaro    Steel    Plant  ) 

Shri  A.  Chatterje  Tariff  Advisory  Committee,  Bombay 

SiiRi  F.  B.  Sanjana  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  N.  Devasahayam  Home  Department  (  Fire  Services  ),  Government  of 

Tamil  Nadu 

Shri  V.  Javapkrumal  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  R.  R.  Dhobley  Bhabha  Atomic  Research  Centre,  Trombay,  Bombay 

Shri  V.  P.  Dew^an  Ministry  of  Defence  (  DGI  ) 

Lt-Col  V.  R.  Ban  ah  ATI  {  Alternate  ) 
DiRECTORj  Fire  Services  Hom.e  (  Police  )  Department,  Government  of  Andhra 

Pradesh,  Hyderabad 

Deputy  Director,  Fire  Services  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  G.  N.  Gidwani  Directorate  General  of  Supplies  &   Disposals,  New 

Delhi 

Shri  D.  N,  Pandit  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  P.  N.  Ghosh  Ministry  of  Defence  (R&D) 

Shri  A.  K.  Suri  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  GoPAL  Krishan  Central     Building     Research     Institute      (GSIR), 

Roorkee 
Shri  K.  K.  Das  Gupta  West  Bengal  Fire  Services,  Calcutta 

ShriJ.  S,  Jamshedji  Steelage    Industries    Limited    (  Minimax  Division  ), 

Calcutta 

Shri  H.  K.  Erani  (  Alternate  ) 
Junior  Manager  (  Fire  )  Heavy    Engineering    Corporation    Ltd,    Ranchi 

Shri  S.  N.  Kundu  Fire   and   Safety   Appliances   Co,    Calcutta 

Shri  S.  Paul  (  Alternate  ) 
Managing  Director  Avon  Services  (  P  &  A  )  Pvt  Ltd,  Bombay 

Technical  Executive  (  Alternate  ) 

(  Continued  on  page  2  ) 


©  Copyright  1982 

INDIAN   STANDARDS  INSTITUTION 

This  publication  is  protected   under  the   Indian  Copyright  Act    (  XIV  of  1957  )  and 

reproduction  in  whole  or  in  part  by  any  means  except  with  written  permission  of  the 

publisher  shall  be  deemed  to  be  an  infringement  of  copyright   under  the  said   Act. 


IS  :  9973  -  1981 

(  Continued  from  page  1  ) 

Members  Representing 

Shri  L.  S.  D.  Mehervanjee  Municipal  Corporation  of  Greater  Bombay  (  Bombay 

Fire  Brigade  ) ,  Bombay 
Shri  V.  B.  Nik  am  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  B.  R.  Mehta  The  Institution  of  Fire  Engineers  India,  New  Delhi 

Shri  A.  N.  Ahluwalia  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  P.  N,  Panchal  Central  Industrial  Security  Force  (  Ministry  of  Home 

Affairs),  New  Delhi 
Shri  P.  C.  Ratho  Steel  Authority   of  India    (  Rourkcla   Steel   Plant  ) 

Shri  C.  D.  Siiarma  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  K.  K.  Sawhney  Air  Foam  Industries  Pvt  Ltd,  New  Delhi 

SiiRi  R.  Mehta  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  P.  L.  Sebastin  Oil   &   Natural   Gas   Commission,   Uehra   Dun 

Shri  V.  V.  Kimmatkar  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  P.  H.  Sethna  Kooverji  Devshi  &   Co  Pvt  Ltd,  Bombay 

Shri  N.  T.  Panjwani  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  D.  K.  Sirkar  Synthetics   &    Chemicals   Limited,  BareiUy 

Shri  J.  V,  Shah  Newage    Industries,    Surendranagar    (  Gujarat  ) 

Shri  B.  J.  Shah  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  Chandrakant  M.  Shah  Zenith  Fire  Services,  Bombay 

Shri  M.  H.  Shah  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  S.  S.  L.  Siiarma  Municipal  Corporation  of  Delhi  ( Delhi  Fire  Services), 

Delhi 
Shri  Sushil  Kumar  Directorate    General     of    Technical    Development, 

New  Delhi 
Shri  Tarit  Sur  Sur  Enamel  &  Stamping  Works  Pvt  Ltd,  Calcutta 

Shri  S.  Sur  {  Alternate  ) 
Shri  S.  Venkaswamy  Directorate   General  of  Civil   Aviation,   New   Delhi 

Shri  B.  V.  Wagle  Urban  Development  and  Public  Health  Department, 

Government  of  Maharashtra,  Bombay 
Shri  V.  H.  Madkaikar  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  G.  Raman,  Director  General,   I  SI    (  Ex-officio   Member  ) 

Director  (  Civ  Engg  ) 

Secretary 

Shri  K.  M.  Mathur 
Deputy  Director  (  Civ  Engg  ),  ISI 


Helmets  Subcommittee,  BDC  22 :5 

Convener 
Air  Cdr  P.  Diiarmaraju  In    personal   capacity    (  P/6-J,    Hauz    Khas    Enclave, 

New  Delhi  110016  ) 

Members 
Shri  M.  K.  Dasgupta  National  Physical  Laboratory  {  CSIR  ).  New  Delhi 

Shri  P.  P.  .Jain  The    Mines    Service    Corporation,    Asarisol 

Shri  A.  P.  Agarwaea  (  Alternate  ) 

(  Continued  on  page  1 0  ) 


IS  :  9973  -  1981 

Indian   Standard 

SPECIFICATION  FOR 
VISOR  FOR  SCOOTER  HELMETS 


0.    FOREWORD 

0.1  This  Indian  Standard  was  adopted  by  the  Indian  Standards  Institution 
on  16  October  1981,  after  the  draft  finalized  by  the  Fire  Fighting  Sectional 
Committee  had  been  approved  by  the  Civil  Engineering  Division  Council. 

0.2  Specifications  for  the  scooter  helmets  are  covered  in  IS  :  4151-1982* 
In  order  to  protect  the  face  from  cold  breeze  and  also  from  obstacles  like 
insects  etc,  many  people  prefer  to  use  visor  along  with  the  helmet.  This 
standard  has  therefore  been  formulated  to  cover  the  requirements  of  such 
visors. 

0.3  For  the  purpose  of  deciding  whether  a  particular  requirement  of  this 
standard  is  complied  with,  the  final  value,  observed  or  calculated,  expres- 
sing the  result  of  a  test  or  analysis,  shall  be  rounded  off  in  accordance  with 
IS  :  2-1960t.  The  number  of  significant  places  retained  in  the  rounded 
off"  value  should  be  the  same  as  that  of  the  specified  value  in  this  standard. 


1.  SCOPE 

1.1  This  standard  covers  the  requirements  in  regard  to  the  material,  con- 
struction, workmanship  and  the  performance  test  for  the  visor  used   in 
motor  cycle  and  scooter  helmets.  This  standard  is  an  adjunct  to  IS  :  415  ^ 
1982*. 

Note  —  If  the  visors  are  manufactured  separately,  these  should  match  to  the 
shape  as  specified. 

2.  TERMINOLOGY 

2.0  For  the  purpose  of  this  standard,  the  following  definitions  shall  apply. 

2.1  Visor  —  The  complete  assembly  of  visor  screen  fitted  with  suitable 
provision  for  attachment  with  the  helmet. 

2.2  Visor   Screen  —  The   curved   transparent   plastic   material    intended 
for  providing  protection  to  the  eyes  and  face. 


*Spccirication  for  protccLivc  liclmcts  for  scooter  and  motor  cycltt  riders  (  second  revision  ). 
tRules  for  rounding  off"  numerical  values  (  revised  ). 


IS  :  9973  -  1981 

3.  MATERIALS 

3.1  The  plastic  material  for  the  visor  screen  shall  be  so  chosen  that  it 
satisfies  the  requirements  given  in  5.  The  bolt  used  for  fixing  of  visor  screen 
with  the  shell  shall  be  corrosion  resistant  {see  IS  :  4151-1982*  ). 

4.  DESIGN 

4.1  The  visor  shall  be  of  adjustable/detachable  type  design  for  quick  and 
easy  attachment  to  and  removable  from  safety  helmets.  The  details  of  the 
shape  and  the  fixing  arrangements  are  shown  in  Fig.  1. 


OFF    POSITION 
OF    VISOR-, 


FRONT 


ORM 

REF.    LINE 


ON   POSITION 
OF  VISOR 


HEAD   FORM 
AS  PER  IS:7592 


Note  —  The  width  of  visor  along  the  curvattirc  shall  not  be  less  than  30  cm. 
All  dimensions  in  millimetres. 

Fig.   1     Typical  Shape  of  the  Visor  for  Motor  Cycle  and 
Scooter  Helmet 


•Specification  for  protective  helmets  for  scooter  and  motor  cycle  riders  (  second  revision ). 


IS  :  9973  -  1981 


5.  REQUIREMENTS 


5.1  Impact  Resistance  —  Mount  the  visor  protective  on  a  suitable 
vertically  mounting  bracket  on  a  wooden  support  fastened  securely  to  a 
base  (  see  Fig.  2  ).  Provide  an  additional  supporting  wooden  block  25  mm 
wide  conforming  to  the  shape  of  plastic  visor,  as  a  support  for  the  visor 
at  the  lower  end.  The  visor  protective  will  then  rest  in  a  position  such  that 
the  axis  of  the  cylindrical/spherical  surface  of  visor  is  upper  most.  Make 
the  impact  test  at  room  temperature  (  20°  -  SO^'G  )  under  normal  humidity 
condition.  Drop  freely  from  a  height  of  one  metre  on  the  apex  of  the  visor 
at  a  point  approximately  60  mm  below  from  the  top  edge  of  the  visor, 
steel  sphericals  ball,  weighing  50  g,  the  visor  shall  not  be  fractured  nor  be 
separated  from  the  mounting. 


GUIDE  TUBE  FOR 
NEEDLE  HOLDER 
OR    STEEL    BALL 


^5SZ^^^^^^^255|^- 


-^r-^-r-^ 


V- 

STAND-i 


1 


ViSOR 


■WOODEN    BLOCK 


y 


ZL 


MOUNTING 
BRACKET 


AJl  dimensions  in  miliiraetirs. 

Fig.  2    Typical  Detail  of  Apparatus  for  Testing  of  Visor  for 
Scooter  Helmei' 


IS  :  9973  -  1981 

5.2  Penetration  Resistance  —  Mount  the  visor  protective  in  the  manner 
described  in  5.1  and  tested  under  similar  conditions.  Drop  freely  a  pointed 
project  of  suitable  size,  consisting  of  a  new  sewing  machine  needle  number 
135x17  size  25  mm  fastened  into  a  holder  weighing  50  g,  needle  point 
downward,  from  the  height  of  the  one  metre  on  the  apex  of  the  visor  at  a 
point  approximately  60  mm  below  the  top  edge  of  the  visor.  The  projectile 
may  be  guided  but  not  restricted  in  its  fall  by  dropping  through  the  tube 
extended  to  within  approximately  10  cm  of  the  protective  visor.  The  visor 
shall  not  be  fractured  nor  pierced  through  by  the  impact  of  projectile. 

5.3  Flammability  —  When  tested  as  per  method  given  in  Appendix  F 
of  IS  :  2925-1975*,  the  rate  of  burning  shall  not  be  greater  than  3  cm/ 
minute. 

5.4  Optical  Requirements 

5.4.1  Distortion  —  There  shall  not  be  any  visual  detectable  distortion 
of  objects  seen  through  the  visor  by  unaided  eye. 

5.4.2  Spherical  and  Cylindrical  Error  —  The  spherical  and  cylindrical  error 
when  tested  as  per  method  given  in  Appendix  A  shall  not  be  more  than 
0-25  dioptre. 

5.4.3  Prismatic  Error  —  The  maximum  prismatic  error  when  tested  as 
per  method  given  in  Appendix  A  shall  be  0*5  dioptre  and  the  maximum 
difference  between  prismatic  power  of  the  left  and  right  side  vision  areas 
of  the  helmet  shall  be  0*5  dioptre. 

5.4.4  Diffuse  Transmittance  —  When  tested  as  per  method  given  in 
Appendix  G  of  IS  :  7569-19751,  the  diffuse  transmittance  shall  not  be 
more  than  5  percent. 

5.4.5  Light  Transmission  —  When  tested  as  per  method  given  in  Appen- 
dix G  of  IS  :  7569-1975t,  the  minimum  light  transmission  shall  be  80  per- 
cent. 

5.5  Field  of  Vision 

5.5.1  The  visor  shall  provide  the  field  of  vision  as  given  in  IS  :4151- 
1982t. 


*Specification  for  industrial  safety  helmets  {fif!it  revi.iton  ). 
t Specification  for  cast  acrylic  sheets  for  use  in  luminaircs. 
:J:Specification  for  protective  helmets  for  scooter  and  motor  cycle  riders  f  second  revision 


IS  :  9973  -  1981 

6.  WORKMANSHIP  AND  FINISH 

6.1  The  visor  screen  shall  be  optically  clear,  free  from  surface  imperfections, 
scratches,  bubbles  and  irregularities  causing  visual  irregularities.  All  edges 
shall  be  finished  smooth  and  shall  be  free  from  burrs,  protrusions  and 
irregularities. 

7.  MASS 

7.1  The  mass  of  the  complete  visor  shall  not  exceed  350  g.  If  the  mass 
exceeds  350  g,  this  mass  determined  to  the  nearest  10  g  shall  be  shown 
on  the  label  attached  to  the  visor. 

8.  INSTRUCTIONS 

8.1  Each  visor  shall  be  supplied  with  a  printed  card  fixed  with  a  tag  having 
the  following  information: 

a)  To  maintain  a  good  field  of  vision,  formation  of  scratches  and 
accumulation  of  dirt  on  the  visor  screen  shall  be  avoided. 

b)  No  organic  solvents  or  materials  containing  organic  solvents  such 
as  metal  pohsh,  waxes  and  pohshes  shall  be  used  to  clean  the  visor 
screen. 

c)  A  soft  cloth  shall  be  used  to  wipe  the  visor  for  removing  dust,  dirt, 
etc. 

9.  MARKING 

9.1   Each  visor  shall  be  marked  with  the  following  information: 

a)  Manufacturer's  name  or  trade-mark,  and 

b)  Year  of  manufacture. 

9.1.1  The  visor  may  also  be  marked  with  the  ISI  Certification  Mark: 

Note  —  The  use  of  the  ISI  Certification  Mark  is  governed  by  the  provisions  of" 
the  Indian  Standards  Institution  (  Certification  Maries  )  Act  and  the  Rules  and 
Regulations  made  thereunder.  The  ISI  Mark  on  products  covered  by  an  Indian 
Standard  conveys  the  assurance  that  they  have  been  produced  to  comply  with 
the  requirements  of  that  standard  under  a  well-defined  system  of  inspection, 
testing  and  quality  control  which  is  devised  and  supervised  by  ISI  and  operated 
by  the  producer,  ISI  marked  products  are  also  continuously  checked  by  ISI  for 
conformity  to  that  standard  as  a  further  safeguard.  Details  of  conditions  under 
which  a  licence  for  the  use  of  the  ISI  Certification  Marf:  may  be  granted  to  manu- 
faeturers  or  processors,  may  be  obtained  from  the  Indian  Standards  Institution. 


IS  :  9973  -  1981 

APPENDIX     A 

{Clauses   5.4.2  and  5.4.3) 

METHOD  OF  TEST  FOR  SPHERICAL  AND  CYLINDRICAL  ERROR 

A-1.  APPARATUS 

A-1.1  Telescope  - — •  Having  a  magnification  between  7 '5  and  20  (  recom- 
mended magnification  15  )  with  an  aperture  of  15  to  20  mm  and  an  adjust- 
able eye-piece  fitted  with  a  graticule,  for  example,  a  theodolite  which  is 
adjustable  both  vertically  and  laterally. 

Note  —  In  the  event  when  the  telescope  shows  a  doubling  of  the  image  or  other 
aberrations,  the  ocular  to  be  tested  shall  be  examined  with  a  5  mm  aperture  in 
instrument  to  locate  and  qualify  the  area  or  areas  of  observation  in  the  total  area 
of  20  mm  diameter.  A  focome  cr  may  be  used  for  this  purpose. 

A-1. 2  Adjustable  Light  Source  with  Condenser 

A-1,2.1  Target  —  Consisting  of  a  black  plate  with  the  cut-out  pattern 
shown  in  Fig.  1  of  IS  :  7524  (  Part  II  )-1980*.  The  bars  are  2-0  mm  wide. 
The  bigger  annulus  depicted  inside  the  bars  has  a  diameter  of  46  mm  with 
an  annular  aperture  of  0*6  mm  and  the  smaller  annular  has  a  diameter 
of  23  mm.  The  diameter  of  the  central  aperture  is  0'6  mm.  This  target 
is  mounted  on  a  glass  plate. 

A-1.2.2  Standard  Lenses  —  With  refractive  powers  of  +  0-06  m-^ ,  +  0*  1 2m-i 
and  ±  0-25  m  '  ( tolerance  +  0-01  m-'  ). 

A-2.  PROCEDURE 

A-2.1  Calibration  and  Test  —  Place  the  telescope  and  the  optical 
system  of  the  target  so  that  thev  are  on  the  same  axis.  Trans- illuminate 
the  target  [  see  Fig.  1  of  IS  :  7524  (  Part  II  )-1980*  ]  by  means  of  a  parallel 
beam  of  a  light  of  adjustable  intensity.  Adjust  the  distance  between  the 
telescope  and  the  target  at  4-6 +  0*1  m.  Focus  the  reticule  and  the  target 
aligning  the  telescope  so  that  a  clear  image  of  the  pattern  is  obtained. 
Regard  this  setting  as  the  zero  point  of  the  dioptre  scale  of  the  telescope. 

NoTF,  —  The  focussing  adjustment  of  the  telescope  shall  be  calibrated  so  that 
a  power  of  O'Ol  m~  '   can  be  measured. 

A-2.2  Insert  the  standard  lenses,  one  at  a  time,  in  the  order  of  ascending 
refractive  powers,  normal  to  the  axis  of  the  telescope,  in  the  path  of  the 
rays  and  adjust  the  telescope  to  get  a  clear  image  of  the  target  each  time. 
Mark  these  positions  on  the  dioptre  scale  of  the  telescope  for  the  respective 
refractive  powers. 


♦Method  of  test  for  eye  protectors;  Part  II  Special  tests. 


IS  :  9973  -  1981 

A-2.3  Next,  insert  the  visor  in  place  of  the  standard  lenses  as  in  A-2.2. 
Adjust  the  telescope  to  get  a  clear  image  and  note  their  refractive  powers 
from  the  dioptre  scale  of  the  telescope. 

A-2.4  Record  astigmatism  of  the  visor  as  the  maximum  difference  betw^een 
the  values  of  refractive  powers  obtained  in  resolving  the  horizontal  and 
vertical  bars  [  see  Fig.  1  of  IS  :  7524  (  Part  II  )-1980*  ]  of  the  target  during 
rotation  of  the  test  lens  around  its  axis. 

A-2.5  For  determining  the  prismatic  power,  place  the  visor  normal  to  the 
axis  of  the  telescope,  in  the  path  of  the  rays  and  adjust  the  telescope  to  get 
a  clear  image.  If  on  doing  so,  the  point  of  intersection  of  the  lines  of  the 
reticule  falls  outside  the  image  of  the  bigger  annulus  the  prismatic  power 
of  the  test  lens  shall  be  taken  as  having  exceeded  0-5  m"'   (  0'5  dioptre  ). 


*Mrliu)ti  oi'tcsl.  Cor  eye  protcclors;Part     II  S|;i-ei;il  lcst:>. 

9 


IS  :  9973  -  1981 

(  Continued  from  page  2  ) 

Members  Representing 

Joint  Director  of  Minis  Safety  Directorate    General    of    Mines    Safety,    Dhanbad 

"Shri  R.  B.  Khurana  Gadgets  India,  Faridabad 

SiiRi  M.  B.  KiitjRANA  (  Alternate  ) 

Shri  G.  B.  Menon  Ministry  of  Home  Affairs 

Shri  U.  S.  Nigam  Central  Mining  Research  Station  (  GSIR  ),  E)hanbad 

Shri  S.  Raju  The  Automotive  Research  Association  of  India,  Punc 

Shri  R.  Ramakrbiinan  Concord  Arai  Private  Ltd,  Madras 

SiiRi  B.  Rajagopal  (  Alternate  ) 

Ma  J  B.  S.  Rikhy  The  Institution  of  Fire  Engineers,  New  Delhi 

Shri  M.  B.  Singh  Ministry  of  Defence  (R&D) 

Shri  K.  Ramachandran  (  Alternate  ) 

Shri  D.  K.  Sirkar  SyuVhelics   &    ChemScal   Limited,    Bareilly 


10 


