**************** 


*■  fe^K 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live" 


IS  4320  (1982):  Thiram,  Technical  [FAD  1:  Pesticides  and 
Pesticides  Residue  Analysis] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New' 


■K^y  / 1  juaaaws^fea  rs^^TTF^ 


2*S<  W I  *>S*V2^NK^ 


^frcvvv^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


?TR  TJ^  ^TT  teMHI  |  ^t  ^Wt  ^^PTT  ^f  ^TT  ^T^?TT  \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


.^^_ 


• 


BLANK  PAGE 


*rt*2V^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


is -.mo -mi 

(  Reaffirmed  2002 ) 

Indian  Standard 


SPECIFICATION  FOR  THIRAM,  TECHNICAL 

(  First  Revision  J 


VDC    632-951  TH1RAM 


©  Copyright  1983 

INDIAN    STANDARDS   INSTITUTION 

MANA*t   Bit  A  VAN.   9   BAHADUR   SHAH   ZAFAR   MARG 

NEW  DELHI   UO0C2 

t;r  3  A  fay  1983 


IS  :  4320  -  1982 

Indian  Standard 
SPECIFICATION  FOR  THIRAM,  TECHNICAL 

(  First  Revision  J 

Pest  Control  Sectional  Committee,  AFCDC  6 

Chairman  Representing 

Dr  K.  D.  Paharia  Directorate    of    Plant    Protection,    Quarantine    & 

Storage  (  Ministry  of  Agriculture ),  Faridabad 

Members 

Dr  H.  L.  Bami  Central    Forensic    Science    Laboratory    ( Central 

Bureau  of  Investigation  ),  New  Delhi 
Dr  B.  Banerjee  Tea  Research  Association,  Calcutta 

Dr  G.  Satyanarayana  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  N.  K.  Basu  The    Alkali    &    Chemical    Corporation    of    India 

Limited,  Calcutta 
Shri  S.  R.  Nene  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  A.  K.  Bhatnagar  Hindustan  Insecticides  Limited,  New  Delhi 

Shri  C.  C.  Abraham  (  Alternate  ) 
Chief  Chemist  Central  Revenues  Control    Laboratory  (  Ministry 

of  Finance  ),  New  Delhi 
Shri  S.  Krishnamurthy  (  Alternate  ) 
Chief  Plant  Protection  Officer    Department     of     Agriculture,     Government     of 

Maharashtra,  Bombay 
Chemist  Incharge,  Insecticides 
Testing  Laboratory  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  V.  G.  Deshpande  Ciba-Geigy  of  India  Limited,  Bombay 

Shri  E.  A.  Almeida  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  Om  P.  Dhamija  Export  Inspection  Council  of  India,  New  Delhi 

Shri  P.  P.  Ranga  Rao  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  M.  S.  Dhatt  National  Malaria  Eradication  Programme,  Delhi 

Director    General,     Armed    Directorate  General  Armed  Forces  Medical  Services 

Forces  Medical  Services  (  Ministry  of  Defence  ),  New  Delhi 

Director  of  Agriculture  Department  of  Agriculture,  Government  of  Uttar 

Pradesh,  Lucknow 
Deputy    Director    (  Plant 
Protection  )  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  V.  Dorairaj  Plastic  Containers  Sectional  Committee,  MCPD  11, 

ISI 

(  Continued  on  page  2  ) 


©     Copyright  1983 

INDIAN  STANDARDS  INSTITUTION 

This  publication  is  protected  under  the  Indian  Copyright  Act  (  XIV  of  1957  )  and 

reproduction  in  whole  or  in  part  by  any  means  except  with  written  permission  of 

the  publisher  shall  be  deemed  to  be  an  infringement  of  copyright  under  the  said  Act. 


IS  :  4320  - 1982 

(  Continued  from  page  1  ) 

Members  Representing 

Drugs  Controller  (  India  )  Indian    Pharmacopoeia    Committee    (  Ministry    of 

Health  and  Family  Welfare  ),  New  Delhi 
Shri  M.  Ravikant  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  G.  D.  Gokhale  Bombay  Chemicals  Private  Limited,  Bombay 

Shri  V.  V.  Ketkar  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  D.  K.  Jain  Punjab    United    Pesticides    and    Chemicals    Ltd, 

Chandigarh 
Joint  Director  of  Agriculture    Department     of     Agriculture,     Government     of 
(  Development  &  ICP  )  Karnataka,  Mysore 

Deputy  Director  of  Agri- 
culture Plant  Protection 
(  Alternate  ) 
Dr  M.  G.  Jotwani  Entomology  Division,  Indian  Agricultural  Research 

Institute  ( ICAR  ),  New  Delhi 
Dr  R.  L.  Kalra  Punjab  Agricultural  University,  Ludhiana 

Dr  R.  P.  Chawla  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  Kalvan  Singh  Chander  Sekhar  Azad  University  of  Agriculture  & 

Technology,  Kanpur 
Dr  Krishan  Singh  Indian  Institute  of  Sugarcane  Research  ( ICAR  ), 

Lucknow 
Dr  S.  C.  Srivastava  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  K.  Krishnamurthy  Ministry  of  Agriculture  (  Department  of  Food  ), 

New  Delhi 
Shri  G.  N.  Bhardwaj  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  S.  G.  Krishnan  National    Organic    Chemical    Industries    Limited, 

Bombay 
Dr  J.  S.  Verma  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  V.  Lakshminarayana  Directorate    of   Plant    Protection,    Quarantine    & 

Storage  (Ministry  of  Agriculture),  Faridabad 
Shri  V.  C.  Bhargava  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  S.  K.  Luthra  Directorate    General    of  Technical    Development, 

New  Delhi 
Shri  S.  C,  Bajaj  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  J.  C.  Majumdar  BASF  India  Limited,  New  Delhi 

Dr  B.  P.  Chandrasekhar  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  S.  K.  Majumdar  Central    Food    Technological    Research    Institute 

(  CSIR  ),  Mysore 
Shri  M.  Muthu  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  O.  N.  Mehrotra  Ministry  of  Defence  (R&D) 

Shri  M.  G.  Chatterjee  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  K.  S.  Mehta  Bharat  Pulverising  Mills  Private  Ltd,  Bombay 

Shri  S.  Chatterji  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  L.  S.  Mirle  Agromore  Limited,  Bangalore 

Shri  S.  K.  Raman  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  J.  M.  Modi  Pesticides     Formulators     Association     of     India 

(  S.S.L  ),  Bombay 
Dr  S.  R.  Barooah  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  A.  L.  Mookerjee  Cyanamid  India  Limited,  Bombay 

Shri  J.  P.  Parikh  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  S.  K.  Mukerjee  Agricultural  Chemicals  Division,  Indian  Agricultural 

Research  Institute  ( ICAR  ),  New  Delhi 
Dr  N.  K.  Roy  (  Alternate  ) 

(  Continued  on  page  12  ) 


IS  :  4320  - 1982 

Indian  Standard 
SPECIFICATION  FOR  THIRAM,  TECHNICAL 

(  First  Revision  J 

0.    FOREWORD 

0.1  This  Indian  Standard  (  First  Revision )  was  adopted  by  the  Indian 
Standards  Institution  on  10  November  1982,  after  the  draft  finalized  by  the 
Pest  Control  Sectional  Committee  had  been  approved  by  the  Agricultural 
and  Food  Products  Division  Council  and  the  Chemical  Division  Council. 

0.2  Thiram,  technical  is  used  in  the  preparation  of  various  formulations 
for  the  control  of  diseases  of  agricultural  crops. 

0.3  Thiram,  is  the  accepted  common  name  by  the  International  Organiza- 
tion for  Standardization  ( ISO )  for  the  pesticide  chemical  containing  bis 
( dimethylthiocarbamoyl )  disulphide  as  its  active  ingredient.  The  struc- 
tural and  empirical  formulae  and  the  molecular  mass  of  this  compound  are 
as  indicated  below: 

Empirical  Formula  Structural  Formula  Molecular  Mass 

C6H12N2S4  (CH3)2N-!U  240'4 

II 
(C  H3)2   N— C— S 


0.4  This  standard  was  first  published  in  1967  and  subsequently  one 
amendment  was  issued.  As  this  standard  was  prepared  more  than  a 
decade  ago,  it  was  considered  desirable  to  issue  a  revised  version  of  the 
standard  in  order  to  make  it  up  to  date.  The  present  revision  incorporates 
latest  packing  and  marking  requirements  along  with  the  modified  carbon 
disulphide  evolution  method  and  the  amine  method  which  have  been  found 
to  give  comparable  results. 

0.5  In  the  preparation  of  this  standard,  due  consideration  has  been  given 
to  the  provisions  of  the  Insecticides  Act,  1968  and  the  Rules  framed  there- 
under. However,  this  standard  is  subject  to  the  restrictions  imposed 
under  these,  wherever  applicable. 


IS  :  4320  -  1982 

0.6  For  the  purpose  of  deciding  whether  a  particular  requirement  of  this 
standard  is  complied  with,  the  final  value,  observed  or  calculated,  express- 
ing the  result  of  a  test  or  analysis,  shall  be  rounded  off  in  accordance  with 
IS: 2-1060*.  The  number  of  significant  places  retained  in  the  rounded  off 
value  should  be  the  same  as  that  of  the  specified  value  in  this  standard. 


1.  SCOPE 

1.1  This  standard  prescribes  the  requirements  and  methods  of  sampling 
and  test  for  thiram,  technical. 

2.  REQUIREMENTS 

2.1  Description  —  The  material  shall  be  white  to  off  white  powder.  It 
shall  comprise  essentially  tetramethyl  thiuram  disulphide  ( TMTD )  and 
shall  be  free  from  extraneous  matter. 

2.2  The  material  shall  also  comply  with  the  requirements  specified  in 
Table  1. 


TABLE  1     REQUIREMENTS  FOR  THIRAM,  TECHNICAL 

(  Clause  2.2  ) 


Sl 
No. 

Characteristic 

Requirements 

Method  of  Test 
(  Ref  to  Appendix  ) 

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

i) 

Bis  (dimethylthiocarbamoyl )  disulphide, 
percent  by  mass,  Min 

950 

A 

ii) 

Loss  on  drying  at  60°C,  percent  by  mass, 
Max 

05 

B 

ni) 

Ash  content,  percent  by  mass,  Max 

0*5 

C 

3.  PACKING  AND  MARKING 

3.1  Packing  —  The  material  shall  be  packed  as  per  requirements  given  in 
IS:  8190  (Partl)-1980t. 


♦Rules  for  rounding  off  numerical  values  (  revised). 

tRequirements  for  packing  of  pesticides:  Part  I  Solid  pesitcides  (  first  revision  ). 


IS  :  4320  - 1982 

3.2  Marking  —  The  containers  shall  bear  legibly  and  indelibly  the  following 
information  and  any  other  information  as  is  necessary  under  the 
Insecticides  Act  and  Rules: 

a)  Name  of  the  material; 

b)  Name  of  the  manufacturer; 

c)  Date  of  manufacture; 

d)  Batch  number; 

e)  Net  mass  of  the  contents; 

f)  Thiram  content,  percent  (  m\m  );  and 

g)  A  cautionary  notice  as  worded  in  Insecticides  Act  and  Rules. 

3.2.1  Each  container  may  also  be  marked  with  the  ISI  Certification 
Mark. 

Note  —  The  use  of  the  ISI  Certification  Mark  is  governed  by  the  provisions 
of  the  Indian  Standards  Institution  (  Certification  Marks  )  Act  and  the  Rules 
and  Regulations  made  thereunder.  The  ISI  Mark  on  products  covered  by  an 
Indian  Standard  conveys  the  assurance  that  they  have  been  produced  to  comply 
with  the  requirements  of  that  standard  under  a  well-defined  system  of  inspection, 
testing  and  quality  control  which  is  devised  and  supervised  by  ISI  and  operated 
by  the  producer.  ISI  marked  products  are  also  continuously  checked  by  ISI  for 
conformity  to  that  standard  as  a  further  safeguard.  Details  of  conditions  under 
which  a  licence  for  the  use  of  the  ISI  Certification  Mark  may  be  granted  to 
manufacturers  or  processors,  may  be  obtained  from  the  Indian  Standards  Institution. 

4.  SAMPLING 

4.1  The  representative  samples  of  the  material  shall  be  drawn  as  prescribed 
in  the  'Indian  Standard  Methods  for  sampling  of  pesticides  and  their 
formulations'  (  under  prepration  ). 

Note  —  Till  such  time  the  standard  under  preparation  is  published,  the  samples 
shall  be  drawn  as  agreed  to  between  the  parties  concerned. 

5.  TESTS 

5.1  Tests  shall  be  carried  out  as  prescribed  in  the  appropriate  appendices 
referred  to  in  col  4  of  Table  1. 

5.2  Quality  of  Reagents  —  Unless  specified  otherwise,  pure  chemicals  and 
distilled  water  ( see  IS :  1070-1977*  )  shall  be  employed  in  the  tests. 

Note  —  'Pure  chemicals'  shall  mean  chemicals  that  do  not  contain  impurities 
which  affect  the  results  of  analysis. 


♦Specification  for  water  for  general  laboratory  use  (  second  revision  ). 

5 


IS:  4320 -1982 

APPENDIX    A 

[Table  I,  Item  (i)] 
DETERMINATION  OF  THIRAM  CONTENT 

A-0.  GENERAL 

A-0.1  For  the  determination  of  thiram  content,  two  methods,  namely,  the 
carbon  disulphide  evolution  method  ( see  A-l )  and  the  amine  method 
( see  A-2 )  have  been  specified.  Any  one  of  these  methods  may  be 
employed  in  determining  thiram  content  but  carbon  disulphide  evolution 
method  shall  be  the  referee  method  in  case  of  dispute. 

A-l.  CARBON  DISULPHIDE  EVOLUTION  METHOD 

A-l.l  Principle  —  Thiram  on  digestion  with  boiling  acetic  acid/zinc  oxide 
solution,  yields  dimethyl  amine,  carbon-disulphide,  and  a  small  amount  of 
carbonyl  sulphide.  The  gaseous  mixture  is  carried  by  a  stream  of  air 
through  two  absorbers,  the  first  containing  cadmium  sulphate,  to  remove 
hydrogen  sulphide,  and  the  second  absorber  containing  methanolic 
potassium  hydroxide  to  afford  potassium  methyl  xanthate  and  potassium 
methyl  monothiocarbamate  which  are  neutralized  with  dilute  acetic  acid 
and  titrated  with  standard  iodine. 

A-1.2  Reagents 

A-l.2.1  Acetic  Acid/Zinc  Oxide  Solution — Dissolve  2-5  g  of  zinc  oxide 
in  100  ml  of  aqueous  acetic  acid  (1:1). 

A-l.2.2  Cadmium  Sulphate  Solution  —  18*5  percent  (  m/v  ). 

A-l.2.3  Potassium  Hydroxide  —  2  N  in  methanol. 

A-l.2.4  Dilute  Acetic  Acid—  8  percent  solution. 

A-l.2.5  Standard  Iodine  Solution  —  0*1  N. 

A-l.2.6  Starch  Indicator  Solution  —  freshly  prepared. 

A-l.2.7  Phenolphthalein  Indicator  Solution  —  1    percent    mjv    in    ethyl 
alcohol. 

A-1.3  Apparatus  —  The  apparatus  shall  be  as  shown  in  Fig.  1. 

A-1.4  Procedure  —  Assemble  the  apparatus  as  shown  in  Fig.  1  with  30  ml 
cadmium  sulphate  in  the  first  absorber,  and  25  ml  methanolic  potassium 
hydroxide  in  the  second  absorber  and  5  ml  in  each  bubblers.  Maintain  the 
water  bath  surrounding  the  first  absorber  at  70-80°C  throughout  the 
determination.  Keep  cool  the  second  absorber  containing  methanolic 
potassium  hydroxide  by  immersing  it  in  a  beaker  of  melting  ice. 


IS  :  4320  - 1982 


20  ml 


Fig.  1    Apparatus  for  Determination  of  Thiram  by 
Carbon  Disulphide  Evolution  Method 


A-l.4.1  Weigh  accurately  a  quantity  of  the  sample  containing  about 
0*3  g  of  thiram  and  transfer  to  the  digestion  flask.  Add  20  ml  of  the  acid 
mixture  to  the  digestion  flask  containing  thiram  through  the  dropping 
funnel.  Apply  suction  at  a  rate  that  approximately  three  bubbles  of  air  per 
second  pass  through  the  absorbers. 

A-l.4.2  Boil  the  contents  of  the  flask  and  maintain  a  moderate  rate  of 
refluxing  for  60  minutes.  Turn  off  the  condenser  cooling  water,  for  about 
2-3  minutes,  to  flush  the  condenser  and  cadmium  sulphate  absorber  with 
steam,  to  ensure  complete  removal  of  carbon  disulphide  (  see  Note  1 
under  A-1.5  ).     Stop  heating  and  immediately  disconnect  the  absorbers. 

A-l.4.3  Carefully  wash  the  contents  of  the  methanolic  potassium 
hydroxide  absorber  and  bubblers  into  the  beaker  using  300  to  400  ml 
distilled  water.  Add  2  drops  of  phenolphthalein,  neutralize  with  acetic 
acid  from  a  burette  until  the  phenolphthalein,  is  just  decolorized  and  add 
about  0*1  ml  in  excess.  Titrate  the  solution  immediately  ( see  Note  2 
under  A-1.5),  while  stirring,  with  iodine  solution  nearly  to  the  end  point, 
add  starch  indicator  solution  and  complete  titration  till  the  colour  changes. 


IS  :  4320  - 1982 

A-1.5  Calculation 

l/vA^y12'02 
Thiram  content,  percent  by  mass  =  m 

where 

V  =  volume,  in  ml,  of  standard  iodine  solution  used  for  sample; 
AT  =  normality  of  iodine  solution;  and 
M—  mass,  in  g,  of  the  sample  taken  for  test. 

Note  1  —  The  residue  in  the  digestion  flask  is  used  for  the  determination  of  the 
thiram  content  by  the  amine  method  (  see  A-2  ). 

Note  2  —  The  iodine  titration  must  be  done,  immediately  and  rapidly,  after 
neutralization,  as  decomposition  of  the  mixed  xanthate/monothiocarbamate  solution 
is  extremely  rapid  under  acidic  conditions,  hence  this  exercise  should  be  completed 
within  2  minutes. 

A-2,  AMINE  METHOD 

A-2.1  Principle  —  The  residue  obtained  after  digestion  with  acetic  acid/zinc 
oxide  solution  ( see  A-l.l )  is  treated  with  sodium  hydroxide  solution,  the 
liberated  dimethyl  amine  is  distilled  off,  absorbed  in  saturated  solution  of 
boric  acid,  and  titrated  with  standard  sulphuric  acid  solution,  using  a  mixed 
bromocresol  green-methyl  red  indicator. 

A-2.2  Reagents 

A-2.2,1  Standard  Sulphuric  Acid  Solution  —  0*1  N. 

A-2.2.2  Boric  Acid—  Saturated  solution. 

A-2.2.3  Sodium  Hydroxide  Solution  —  40  percent  (iw/v). 

A-2.2.4  Bromocresol  Green—  Methyl  Red  Mixed  Indicator  Solution  — 
Dissolve  0*2  g  of  bromocresol  green  and  0*05  g  of  methyl  red  in  about 
250  ml  ethanol. 

A-2.3  Apparatus  —  The  apparatus  shall  be  as  shown  in  Fig.  2. 

A-2.4  Procedure  —  Wash  the  residue  {see  A-l.4.2  and  Note  1  under  A-1.5) 
from  the  digestion  flask  into  a  500  ml  distillation  flask  using  about  250  ml 
distilled  water.  Add  a  little  pumice  powder  and  assemble  the  apparatus 
as  shown  in  Fig,  2  making  sure  that  the  lip  of  the  condenser  adopter  is 
under  the  surface  of  the  saturated  boric  acid  solution. 

A-2.4.1  Add  50  ml  sodium  hydroxide  solution  slowly  from  the  dropping 
funnel  and  boil  the  contents  of  the  flask  and  collect  the  distillate  in  50  ml 
boric  acid  solution.  Continue  distillation  until  the  distillate  is  neutral  to 
red  litmus  (  about  20  minutes  ). 

8 


IS  :  4320  -  1982 


Fig.  2    Apparatus  for  Determination  of 
Thiram  by  Amine  Method 

A-2.4.2  When  distillation  is  complete,  remove  the  heating  source,  wash 
down  the  condenser  walls  and  the  adopter  with  small  quantity  of  distilled 
water  into  the  boric  acid  solution. 

A-2.4.3  Titrate  the  solution  with  sulphuric  acid  solution  using  bromo- 
cresol  green-methyl  red  mixed  indicator  solution  to  the  first  appearance  of 
pink  colour. 


A-2.5  Calculation 


Thiram  content,  percent  by  mass  = 


VxNx  12-02 
M 


where 


V  =  volume,  in  ml,  of  standard  sulphuric  acid  solution  used; 

N  =  normality  of  sulphuric  acid  solution;  and 

M  =  mass,  in  g,  of  the  sample  taken  for  test  ( see  A-J.4.1 ). 


IS  :  4320  -  1982 

APPENDIX    B 

{Table  1,  Item  (ii)] 
DETERMINATION  OF  LOSS  ON  DRYING 

B-l.  PROCEDURE 

B-l.l  Take  about  5  g  sample  on  a  tared  petri  dish  (5  to  6  cm  diameter). 
Spread  it  over  uniformly  and  weigh.  Put  the  petri  dish  with  the  material  in 
a  thermostatic  air-oven  at  60°C  for  4  hours.  Cool  the  petri  dish  and  the 
material  in  a  desiccator  and  weigh.  Repeat  this  operation  till  a  constant 
weight  is  obtained. 

B-2.  CALCULATION 

B-2.1  Loss  on  drying,  percent  by  mass  =  ^m2"W3)  100 


where 


m2  =  mass,  in  g,  of  the  petri  dish  and  sample  before  drying; 
m3  =  mass,  in  g,  of  the  petri  dish  and  sample  after  drying;  and 
mt  =  mass  in  g  of  the  petri  dish. 


APPENDIX    C 

[Table  h  Item  (iii)] 
DETERMINATION  OF  ASH  CONTENT 

C-l.  PROCEDURE 

C-l.l  Weigh  accurately  2  to  3  g  sample  on  a  dry  tared  10-ml  silica  basin, 
burn  it  slowly  and  carefully  in  a  fume  cupboard  with  good  exhaust 
arrangement.  The  temperature  should  not  exceed  555°C.  Cool  the  basin 
and  add  a  drop  or  two  of  concentrated  sulphuric  acid,  heat  the  basin  slowly 
to  remove  sulphur  trioxide  fumes  and  finally  to  800°C  to  900°C  for  about 
an  hour.    Cool  the  basin  in  a  desiccator  and  weigh. 

10 


IS:  4320 -1982 

C-2.  CALCULATION 

C-2.1  Ash*  content,  percent  by  mass  =  ~2~m*xl00 

m 

where 

ms  =  mass,  in  g,  of  the  basin  and  sulphated  ash; 
mx  —  mass,  in  g,  of  the  basin;  and 
m    =  mass,  in  g,  of  the  sample. 


11 


IS  :  4320  - 1982 

(  Continued  from  page  2  ) 

Members  Representing 

Shri  K.  R.  Narayana  Rao  Food  Corporation  of  India,  New  Delhi 

Shrimati  K.  K.  M.  Bhavnani  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  I.  Narsareddy  Department  of  Agriculture,  Government  of  Andhra 

Pradesh,  Hyderabad 

Shri  C.  Dharma  Rao  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  G.  Natarajan  Indofil  Chemicals  Limited,  Bombay 

Dr  V.  N.  Nigam  Ministry  of  Defence  (  DGI  ) 

Shri  P.  N.  Agarwal  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  M.  M.  Padalia  Department     of     Agriculture,     Government      of 

Gujarat,  Ahmadabad 

Shri  R.  G.  Jadeja  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  S.  Y.  Pandit  Bayer  ( India  )  Limited,  Bombay 

Shri  C.  G.  Dharne  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  P.  S.  Phadke  Sandoz  ( India  )  Limited,  Thane 

Shri  A.  V.  Natu  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  S.  M.  Pradhan  Metal  Containers  Sectional  Committee,  MCPD  12, 

ISI 
Shri  Y.  A.  Pradhan  Rallis  India  Limited,  Bombay 

Dr  Z.  J.  Kapadia  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  D.  N.  V.  Rao  Tata  Chemicals  Limited,  Mithapur 

Shri  C.  Neelkantan  (  Alternate  ) 
Representative  Pesticides  Association  of  India,  New  Delhi 

Secretary  Central   Insecticides    Board,   Directorate   of  Plant 

Protection,  Quarantine  &   Storage    (  Ministry 
of  Agriculture  ),  Faridabad 

Dr  R.  C.  Gupta  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  A.  C.  Shroff  Excel  Industries  Limited,  Bombay 

Shri  P.  V.  Kango  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  K.  S.  Singh  Indian    Veterinary    Research    Institute    ( ICAR  ), 

Izatnagar 

Shri  S.  C.  Srivastava  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  N.  S.  Venkataraman  Department  of  Agriculture,  Government  of  Tamil 

Nadu,  Madras 
Dr  R.  V.  Venkataratnam  Regional  Research  Laboratory  (  CSIR  ),  Hyderabad 

Dr  Nagabushan  Rao  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  P.  R.  Venkateswaran  Union  Carbide  ( India  )  Limited,  New  Delhi 

Dr  K.  N.  Shrivastava  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  E.  R.  Viccajee  Paper  and  Flexible  Packaging  Sectional  Committee, 

MCPD  14,  ISI 
Shri  N.  G.  Wagle  Pest  Control  ( India  )  Private  Limited,  Bombay 

Shri  M.  R.  Bajikar  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  B.  L.  Wattal  National  Institute  of  Communicable  Diseases,  Delhi 

Shri  G.  C.  Joshi  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  T.  Purnanandam,  Director  General,  ISI  ( Ex-officio  Member ) 

Director  (  Agri  &  Food  ) 

Secretary 

Shri  M.  L.  Kumar 
Deputy  Director  ( Agri  &  Food  ),  ISI 


12 


PUBLICATIONS    OF   INDIAN   STANDARDS  INSTITUTION 


INDIAN   STANDARDS 

Ovir  10  000  Indian  Standards  covering  v^rtoui  sjjbj«GU  httf*  b«n  fcisoed 
so  far.  Of  th*sep  th*  standard?  belonging  to  the  Agricultural  add  Food 
Products  Group  Fail  under  the  following  categories; 


Abattoir 

A^nc-.JLLi!  ,ii  nimtlilnisrjf  and  tficfOTI 

Alcc^liollc  drinks. 

Animal  feeds 

Animal  Kami  fig  and  equipment 

Bakery  and  conitctFanerj1 

Bee -keeping  equip  mene 

B*v#rifH 

CEr^als.  pulirt  and  their  product; 

Coca*  product* 

Coffee  and  lis  products. 

Dairy  equipment 

Dairy  industry,  layout  plans 

Dairy  industry,  methods  of  test 

Dair  y  laboratory  appjntui 

Dairy  proctitis 

E  dibit  starch  and  vtarnhy  pioducts 

Flih  and  fish  er?  product! 

Fiifi  Industry,  mnitiry  conditions 


food  additJvG5 

Food  f  rain  handling  and  storage 

Fruits  and  vegetable* 

Honey  and  by-products 

Infant  food* 

Laboratory  an  tin  ah 

Meat  2nd  tii eat  produce* 

Pest  EGn-troJ  equipmEFit 

Pclticldal  formuiiacions 

Peitieldti,  EfChttlciJ  jride  and  panaral 

Propagation  materials 

Regulated  market  yards 

iensorjr  Evaluation 

Spiffs  and  condlmtmu 

Starch  derived  products. 

Sugars  and  by- products 

Trs 

Tobacco  products 

Transport  of  livt  animals 


OTHER  PUBLICATIONS 


\CA   Bulletin  (  Publishtd  Evary  Monsh) 

Single  Copy 

Annual    Subscription 
Scandardf  :  Ftonfhty  Additions 

5lng!«  Copy 

Annual  Subierlptlon 
Annual  Reports  [from    1948-49  Onwirdi] 
I  SI  Hanrfboak,   1 910 


fti 
Ri 


Ri 


R*        O-J* 
Ra        3* 

1-M  to7JOo 

Rs     lOQ-w 


INDIAN  STANDARDS  INSTITUTION 

M,:,nk   Bharm,  9  Bjhadur  Shah  Zafir  Maf£p  NEW  DELHI  IIQU02 


T«l«ption«:  26  MIL  2?  PI  31 

Regional  QffittWl 

WcsTtrn      p     N-m^lty  Charniflri,  Grant  Road 

E  as  le  r n       :    5  Chow  rl  n  g  h  e  e  A  pp  roa-c  h 
South*™     c     C-  I-  T.  Cantpui 
Northern,    ;     B6f<  MiiM  VII 

Branch  Ojjficesi 

pPushp*k\  Nurmyhamid  Shaikh  Mir|t  Khanpur 

■FF  Blodk,  Unity  BUIj.  Narasimharaia  Square 

Ganjotrl  Complex.  BiiaikhadJ  Road,  T.T.Nagar 

JIE  KalpUH  Area 

S-B-S6C  L.  N.  Guptl  Mar* 

RM  Yudhisccr  Mnrg,  C  Scheme 

I  IT '416  B  Sarvodaya  Nagar 

Paillputra  induitrint  L*Ut* 

HanxtK  flldf  (  Ind  Floor  J.  Rly  Station  Road 


T  cleg  rami:  Maiimkumth* 

Telephone 

BOMBAY  4(30007 

CALCUTTA  700071 

MADRAS  *Q0|  13 

S.A.S.  NAGAR. 
(MOHAL1)  I600SI 


AHMAD  A  BAD JWOGl 
BANGALORE   hhQUU'l 
BHOPAL  4«Q03 
BHUBAMESHWAR  75I0M 

HYDERABAD  50000-1, 
JAIPUR  301MS 
KAN  PUR  2O&0Q5 
PATNAB0OOI1 
TRIVANDKUM  4MU0I 


8V  65  28 

27  50  90 

41  144 

3 

6  70  26 

2  03  9 

I 

22  46  05 

4  17  16 

£36  27 

22  10  83 

4  9B33 

4  72W 

6  23  0B 

32  2 

; 

printed  it  Briimn.i  Cll  til  till  f  Mlj  Co.OkuLLi,  Indu 


