**************** 



*■ *Z**K 





Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 

Jawaharlal Nehru 
Step Out From the Old to the New 



mr^sssss^^t^ 




,_A» 




**************** 



BLANK PAGE 



<_<ii££ 





UJ> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 732 -1989 
( Reaffirmed 2005 ) 



Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 
ELECTRICAL WIRING INSTALLATIONS 

( Third Revision ) 

Second Reprint FEBRUARY 1999 



UDC 621.315.3.696.6 : 006.76 



© Copyright 1989 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Price Rs 225.00 November 1989 



IS i 732 - 1989 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 
ELECTRICAL WIRING INSTALLATIONS 

( Third Revision ) 

Electrical Installations Sectional Committee, ETDG 20 

Chairman 

Shbi M. L. Dongbe 

M-3 Satyam, 88 Sion Circle, Bombay 400 022 

Members Representing 

Shri P. Ananthabaman Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters ( Ministry of 

Defence ), New Delhi 

Shbi S. K. Shangabi ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. D. Bagade Tata Consulting Engineers, Bombay 

Shbi R. K, Kaul ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. S. Bhatia Siemens India Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi M. M. Shethna ( Alternate ) 
Shbi K. V. Chaubal Federation of Electricity Undertaking of India, Bombay 

Shbi K. S. Joshi ( Alternate ) 
Shbi R. R. Choudhuhi Larsen & Toubro ( Construction Group ), Madras 

Shri N. Balasubramanian ( Alternate ) 
Chief Electrical Engineeb Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways }, New Delhi 

Deputy Director Standards ( Eleo )-DI, 
RDSO ( Alternate ) 
Chief Electrical Inspector to Government Chief Electrical Inspector to Government of Tamil Nadu, Madras 
of Tamil Nadu 

Electrical Inspector ( Technical ) to 
Government of Tamil Nadu ( Alternate ) 
Chief Engineer ( Eleo )-I Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 

Superintendent Surveyor of Works 
( Elec )-I ( Alternate ) 
Shri Devender Nath Larsen & Toubro Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi T. P. R. Sarma ( Alternate ) 
Shbi K. W. Dharmadhikart Jyoti Ltd, Vadodara 

Db V. N. Maller ( Alternate ) 
Shbi G. L. Dua Rural Electrification Corporation Ltd, New Delhi 

Shbi S. K. Sethi ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. C. Khanna Delhi Electric Supply Undertaking, New Delhi 

Shbi P. S. Sawhney ( Alternate ) 
Member ( Hydbo-Electric ) Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi 

Director ( HED )-I ( Alternate ) 
Er S. Paneebselvam Tamil Nadu Electricity Board, Madras 

Shbi V. Janabdhanan ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. P, R. Pillai Fact Engineering and Design Organization, Udyogamandal 

Shbi C. R. R. Mjenon ( Alternate } 
Shbi V. Radha Krishnan Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Hyderabad 

Shbi H. S. Rao Crompton Greaves Ltd, Bombay 

Prof G. Raveendr an Naib Chief Electrical Inspector to the Government of Kerala, Trivandrum 

Shbi S. R. Sarda Maharashtra State Electricity Board, Bombay 

Shri R. Sathiyabal Tariff Advisory Committee ( General Insurance ), Bombay 

Shbi K. K. Mondal ( Alternate ) 
Shbi H. K. Sitabam Calcutta Electric Supply Corporation Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri S. K. Palit ( Alternate ) 
Shbi P. Srinivasa Poti Karnataka Electricity Board, Bangalore 

Shbi Joseph Philomeny ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. S. Tawabe Electrical Engineer to Government of Maharashtra, Bombay 

Shbi S. J. Haridas ( Alternate ) 
Shbi G. N. Thadani Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi 

Shtu S. K. Ghosh ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. S. Thakub Chief Electrical Inspector, Government of Madhya Pradesh, Bhopal 

( Continued an page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1989 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of'1957 ) and production in whole or in part by 
any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright 
under the said Act. 



!Sr732-lM9 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Chairman Representing 

Shri V. T. Wabang Bombay Electric Supply and Transport Undertaking, Bombay 

Shri R. P. Patel ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. P. Sachdey, Director General, BIS ( Ex-offieio Member ) 

Director ( Elec tech ) 

Secretary 

Shri K. Ganesh 
Deputy Director ( Elec tecb ), BIS 

Panel for Electrical Wiring Installations, ETDG 20 : P30 

Convener 
Shri R. K. Sehgal Bombay Suburban Electric Supply Co Ltd, Bombay 

Members 

Shri P. S. Pandya ( Alternate to 
Shri R. K. Sehgal ) 
Chibf Engineer ( Elect )-I Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 

Superintending Stoveyor of Works 
( Elect )-I ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. Krishnaswamy Best and Crompton Engineering Ltd, Madras 

Shri A. G. LaxshMiNarayanan ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. N. Ptjeakpabb Electrical Contractor's Association of Maharashtra, Bombay 

Shri Shirish S. Jhaveri ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. P. R Pillai Fact Engineering and Design Organization, Udyogamandal 

Shri A. O. Ookhbn ( Alternate) 
Prof G. Raveendrak Nair Chief Electrical Inspector to the Government of Kerala, Trivandrum 

Shri R. Sathiyabal Tariff Advisory Committee, Bombay 

Shri K. K. Mondai, ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. K. Thadani Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters, New Delhi 

Shri R. K. Subi ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. N. Thadani Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 

Shri S. K. Ghosb ( Alternate ) 



IS : 732 . 1989 



CONTENTS 



Page 

0. Foreword ... 5 

1. Scope ... 6 



SECTION 1 TERMINOLOGY 



2. Terminology 



SECTION 2 ASSESSMENT OF GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS 

OF INSTALLATIONS 

3. Assessment of Characteristics — General ... 12 

4. External Influences ... 13 

SECTION 3 PROTECTION FOR SAFETY 

5. Requirements for Protection for Safety ... 19 

SECTION 4 DESIGN OF INSTALLATION, SELECTION AND 
ERECTION OF EQUIPMENT 

6. Fundamental Requirements ... 39 

7. Common Rules ... 41 

8. Cables, Conductors and Wiring Materials ... 43 

9. Switchqear ... 49 

10. Earthing Arrangement and Protective Conductors ... 51 

11. Supplies for Safety Services -## 51 

SECTION 5 INSPECTION AND TESTING 

12. Initial Inspection and Testing ... 52 

13. Alterations to Installations w 54 

Appendix A Types of Wiring Systems and Their Selection ... 54 

Appendix B Methods of Internal Wiring 60 

Appendix C Guidelines for Specific Equipment, Fittings and 

Accessories ... 68 

Appendix D Specific Guidance of Selection of Equipment with 

Regard to External Influences ... 70 

Appendix E Check List of Initial Inspection ... 74 



As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank 



IS i 732 - 1989 



Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 
ELECTRICAL WIRING INSTALLATIONS 

( Third Revision ) 

0. FOREWORD 



0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the 
Bureau of Indian Standards on 25 January 1989, 
after the draft finalized by the Low Voltage 
Switchgear and Gontrolgear Sectional Committee 
had been approved by the Electrotechnical Divi- 
sion Council. 

0.2 The Indian Electricity Rules, together with 
the supplementary regulations of the state electri- 
city departments and electricity undertakings, 
govern the electrical installation work in build- 
ings in this country. Regulations for the electrical 
equipment in buildings as recommended by the 
Institution of Electrical Engineers, UK, have also 
often been followed in this work. Expanding use 
of electricity and increase in the number of elec- 
trical installations in buildings, necessitated the 
preparation of a code of practice to guide and 
govern installation of electrical wirir.g in build- 
ings, with particular reference to safety and good 
engineering practice. This code was, therefore, 
first published in 1958 with the above objective. 

0.3 Since the first version of this code covered 
electrical installations only in buildings which 
could be considered as non-industrial locations, 
where the system voltage generally did not exceed 
650 volts, the need for having a similar code for 
industrial locations was also felt and many addi- 
tional requirements had to be looked after. There- 
fore, in addition to the revision of this code, a 
separate code on the latter subject was published 
as IS : 2274-1963*. 

0.4 Experience in implementation of these stan- 
dards had proved that most of the 'industrial' 
installations required references to guidelines for 
system of voltages not exceeding 650 V in their 
design. Moreover, considerations such as layout 
of electrical installations, measurement, etc, for 
which separate Indian Standard specifications 
exist, require comprehensive reading, and it has 
been felt that a single Indian Standard to provide 
for all aspects of wiring 1 would serve as a com- 
prehensive reference guide on the subject. 

0.5 In the second version of IS : 732 brought out 
in 1982 in 3 parts, this fact has been taken into 



♦Code of practice for electrical wiring installations 
( system voltage exceeding 650 volts ). 



account in that the information has been called 
from various Indian Standard specifications and 
other literature available and presented as a single 
comprehensive code. Efforts were made to iden- 
tify gaps and the opportunity utilised to incor- 
porate the latest trends in wiring practice. It is, 
however, indicated that this revision was purely 
a temporary measure to meet the immediate 
needs of the practising engineers and the ultimate 
aim was to bring out a comprehensive safety- 
oriented code on electrical installations in build- 
ings based on the international work in this 
regard. 

0.6 Soon after the publication of the second 
revision, work on the preparation of National 
Electrical Code ( NEC ) began under the purview 
of the National Electrical Code Sectional Commi- 
ttee, ETDC 56. This work, aimed as a compen- 
dium of all relevant information in IS Codes 
including IS : 732, concluded in 1985 when NEC 
was published. NEC besides drawing assistance 
from IS : 732, further elaborates the stipulations 
on wiring practice with reference to specific 
occupancies. 

0.7 During the preparation of NEC it became 
evident that IS : 732 would require considerable 
updating in order to align with modified pattern 
of power consumption and advancing technology 
in installation design. There was also a strong 
need to align the code with the work being accom- 
plished at the international level, namely, at the 
level of IEC/TC 64 'Electrical Installations of 
Buildings', which cover comprehensively the rele- 
vant issues. This revision of IS : 732 ( third ) is 
an attempt to improve the contents of the code 
to meet this need. 

0.8 It is emphasized that the information con- 
tained in this code is oriented towards electrical 
safety. The accent is on protection from the 
various hazards arising from use of electricity and 
the rules relating to wiring practice are based on 
the international guidelines on such matters. It 
is in this respect that the present version of this 
standard differs from the earlier versions which 
were oriented towards design and constructional 
aspects. However, a series of appendices have 
been added to this Code dealing with specific 



IS i 732 -1989 

guidelines on wiring practice as applicable to 
design, construction and execution of work. 
Whenever necessary, the provisions of this Code 
shall be read in conjunction with other Codes 
such as those on earthing, lightning protection, 
etc, 

0.9 In the preparation of this standard, consider- 
able assistance has been derived from the follow- 
ing publications: 

IEG Pub 364 ( in several parts ) Electrical 
Installations of Buildings. The International 
Electrotechnical Commission ( IEU ). 

IEC Doc: 64 ( Secretariat ) 437 Electrical 
Installations of Buildings. Part 2 Definitions. 
International Electrotechnical Commission 
( IEC ). 

IEC Doe: ( IEV 826 ) ( Central Office ) 1193 
International Electrotechnional Vocabulary. 
Part 826 Electrical Installations of Buildings. 



The International Electrotechnical Commission 
( IEC )'. 

IEC Doc: 64 { Secretariat ) 430. Pub 364 
Chapter 52 Selection and Erection of Wiring 
Systems. The International Electrotechnical 
Commission ( IEG ). 

IEE Wiring Regulations 'Regulations for 
electrical installations'" 15th Edition ( 1981 ) 
( as amended up to January 1985 ). The Insti- 
tution of Electrical Engineers ( UK ). 

0.10 For the purpose of deciding whether a 
particular requirement of this standard is complied 
with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded 
off in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number 
of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified 
value in this standard. 



•Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This code covers the essential requirements 
and precautions regarding wiring installations for 
ensuring satisfactory and reliable service and 
safety from all possible hazards from the use of 
electricity. 

1.2 This code applies to the design, selection, 
erection and inspection and testing of wiring 
installations whether permanent or temporary, 
in and about buildings. 

1.3 It relates generally to all wiring installations 
in non-industrial and industrial locations, whe- 
ther the electric supply is derived from an external 
source or from a private generating plant. 

1.4 Installations utilizing the following nominal 
voltage ranges are dealt with in this code: 

a) voltages normally not exceeding 50 V ac 
or 120 V dc whether between conductors 
or to earth. 

b) voltages normally exceeding extra-low 
voltage but not exceeding 1 000 V ac or 
1 500 V dc between conductors or 600 V 
ac or 900 V dc between conductors and 
earth. 



1.5 This code covers all general guidelines appli- 
cable to installations operating within the ranges 
given in 1.4. Supplementary or additional pro- 
visions may be necessary to be complied with in 
respect of specific occupancies depending on their 
nature. For the purposes of guidelines on indi- 
vidual occupancies reference may be National 
Electrical Code ( SP : 30-1985 ). 

1.6 This code is not applicable to the following: 

a) Systems for distribution of energy to the 
public, or to power generation and trans- 
mission for such systems. 

b) Wiring installations in special locations- 
such as mines or other areas where potenti- 
ally explosive atmosphere exists. 

c) Lightning conductors, telecommunications 
and alarm systems. 

d) Traction installations, motor vehicles, ins- 
tallations on board ships, aircraft or 
offshore installations. 

1.7 This code also does not apply to matters 
concerning specifications of individual items of 
equipment and does not deal with requirements 
for the construction of prefabricated assemblies of 
electrical equipment. 



SECTION 1 TERMINOLOGY 



2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purposes of this standard, the follow- 
ing definitions shall apply. 

2.1 Accessory — A device, other than current- 
using equipment, associated with such equipment 
or with the wiring of an installation. 



2.2 Ambient Temperature — The temperature 
of the air or other medium where the equipment 



is to be used. 

2.3 Appliance — An 

equipment other than 
pendent motor. 



item of current using 
a luminaire or an inde- 



IS » 732 - 1989 



2.4 Arm's Reach — A zone extending from any 
point on a surface where persons usually stand or 
move about, to the limits which a person can 
reach with the hand in any direction without 
assistance. 

Note — This space is by convention, limited ai 
shown in Fig. 1. 



Nora 2 — Specially 
also known as ducts. 



formed building voids are 







Z^ 







/////////////// / ////// /y 



777777777 LIMIT OF ARMS REACH 
S «= Surface expected to be occupied by person 
Fio. 1 Arm's Reach 

2.5 Barrier — • A part providing a defined degree 
of protection against contact with live parts, from 
any usual direction of access. 

2.6 Basic Insulation — Insulation applied to 
live parts to provide basic protection against 
electric shock. 

Notb — Basic insulation does not necessarily in- 
clude insulation used exclusively for.functional pur- 
poses. 

2.7 Bonding Conductor — A protective con- 
ductor providing equipotential bonding. 

2.8 Building Voids — Space within the struc- 
ture or the components of a building accessible 
only at certain points. 

Note 1 — Examples are: Space within partitions, 
suspended floors, ceilings and certain types of window 
frame, door frame and architraves. 



2.9 Buried Direct — A cable laid in the ground 
in intimate contact with the soil. 

2.10 Bunched — Gables are said to be bunched 
when two or more are contained within a single 
conduit, duct, ducting, or trunking or, if not 
enclosed, are not separated from each other. 

2.11 Gable Channel — An enclosure situated 
above or in the ground, open or ventilated or 
Closed, and having dimensions which do not 
permit the access of persons but allow access to 
the conductors and /or cables throughout their 
length during and after installation. 

Notb — A cable channel mayor may not form 
part of the building construction 

2.12 Gahle Bracket — A cable support consist- 
ing of single devices fixed to elements of building 
or plant construction. 

2.13 Gahle Coupler — A means enabling the 
connection, at will, of two flexible cables. It con- 
sists of a connector and a plug. 

2.14 Gable Ducting — A manufactured enclo- 
sure of metal or insulating material, other than 
conduit or cable trunking, intended for the protec- 
tion of cables which are drawn-in after erection 
of the ducting, but which is not specifically 
intended to form part of a building structure. 

2.15 Gable Trunking — A factory made closed 
support and protection system into which con- 
ductors and/or cables are laid after removal of the 
cover. 

2.16 Cable Tunnel — An enclosure ( corridor ) 
containing supporting structures for conductors 
and/or cables and joints and whose dimensions 
allow free access to persons throughout the entire 
length. 

2.17 Cable Tray — A cable support consisting 
of a continuous base with raised edges and no 
covering. A cable tray is considered to be non- 
perforated where less than 30 percent of the 
material is removed from the base. 

2.18 Cable Ladder — A cable Support occupy- 
ing less than 10 percent of the plan area and 
consisting of a series of supporting elements 
rigidly fixed to each other or to a main supporting 
member or members. 

2.19 Cartridge Fuse Link — A device com- 
prising a fuse element or several fuse elements 
connected in parallel enclosed in a cartridge 
usually filled with an arc-extinguishing medium 
and connected to terminations. The fuse link is 
the part of a fuse which requires replacing after 
the fuse has operated. 

2.20 Circuit — An assembly of electrical equip- 
ment supplied from the same origin and protected 
against overcurrent by the same protective 



IS t 732 - 1989 



.device (s). Certain types of circuit are categorised 
as follows: 

a) Category 1 Circuit — A circuit ( other than 
a fire alarm or emergency lighting circuit ) 
operating at low voltage and supplied 
directly from a mains supply system. 

b) Category 2 Circuit — With the exception of 
fire alarm and emergency lighting circuits, 
any circuit for telecommunication ( for 
example, radio, telephone, sound distri- 
bution, intruder alarm, bell and call and 
data transmission circuits ) which is sup- 
plied from a safety source. 

c) Category 3 Circuit — A fire alarm circuit or 
an emergency lighting circuit. 

2.21 Circuit Breaker — A mechanical switching 
device capable of making, carrying and breaking 
currents- under normal circuit conditions and also 
of making, carrying for a specified time, and 
breaking currents under specified abnormal 
circuit conditions such as those of short circuit. 

Note — A circuit breaker is usually intended to 
operate infrequently, although some types are suitable 
for frequent operation. 

2.22 Glass I Equipment — Equipment in which 
protection against electric shock does not rely on 
basic insulation only, but which includes an 
additional safety precaution in such a way that 
means are provided for the connection of exposed 
conductive parts to a protective conductor in the 
fixed wiring of installation in such a way that 
accessible conductive parts may not become live 
in the event of a failure of basic installation. 

Note — Tor information on classification of equip- 
ment with regard to means provided for protection 
against electric shock, «* IS : 9409-1980*. 

2.23 Glass II Equipment — Equipment in 
which protection against electric shock does not 
rely on basic insulation only, but in which additio- 
nal safety precautions, such as double or reinforced 
insulation are provided, there being no provision 
for the connection of exposed metalwork of the 
equipment to a protective conductor, and no 
reliance upon precautions to be taken in the fixed 
wiring of the installation . 

2.24 Conduit — A part of a closed wiring system 
a circular or non-circular cross section for conduc- 
tors and/or cables in electrical installations, 
allowing them to be drawn in and/or replaced. 

Conduits should be sufficiently closed-jointed 
so that the conductors can only be drawn in and 
not inserted laterally. 

2.25 Confined . Conductive Location — A 

location having surfaces which are mainly com- 
posed of extraneous condutive parts and which 
are of such dimensions that movement is restricted 
to such an extent that contact with surfaces is 
difficult to avoid ( for example, in a boiler ). 



'Classification of electrical and electronic equipment 
with regard to protection against electric shock. 



2.26 Connector — The part of a cable coupler 
or of an appliance coupler which is provided 
with female contact and is intended to be attached 
to the flexible cable connected to the supply. 

2.27 Conventional Touch Voltage Limit — 

Maximum value of the touch voltage which is 
permitted to be maintained indefinitely in specified 
conditions of external influences. 

2.28 Conventional Operating Current ( of a 
Protective Device ) — A specified value of the 
current which causes the protective device to 
operate within a specified time, designated 
conventional time. 

Note — For fuses this current is called the ' con- 
ventional fusing current *. For circuit breakers this 
current is called the ' conventional operating current '. 

The conventional operating current is greater than 
the rated current or current setting of the device and 
the conventional time varies according to the type and 
rated current of the protective device. 

2.29 Current Carrying Capacity of a Con- 
ductor — The maximum current which can be 
carried by a conductor under specified conditions 
without its steady state temperature exceeding a 
specified value. 

2.30 Current Using Equipment — Equipment 
which converts electrical energy into another 
form of energy, such as light, heat, or motive 
power. 

2.31 Danger — Danger to health or danger to 
life or limb from shock, burn or injury from 
mechanical movement to persons ( and livestock 
where present ) , or from fire attendent upon the 
use of electrical energy. 

2.32 Design Current ( of a Circuit ) — The 

magnitude of the current intended to be carried 
by the circuit in normal service. 

2.33 Direct Contact — Contact of persons or 
livestock with live parts which may result in 
electric shock. 

2.34 Distribution Circuit ( of Buildings )— A 

circuit supplying a distributing board. 

2.35 Double Insulation — Insulation compris- 
ing both basic insulation and supplementary 
insulation. 

2.36 Duct — A closed passage way formed 
underground or in a structure and intended to 
receive one or more cables which may be drawn 
in. 

2.37 Ducting — See 2.14. 

2.38 Earth — The conductive mass of the earth, 
whose electric potential at any point is conven- 
tionally taken as zero. 

2.39 Earth Electrode — A conductor or group 
of conductors in intimate contact with and provid- 
ing an electrical connection to earth. 



8 



IS i 732- 1989 



2.40 Earth Electrode Resistance — The resis- 
tance of an earth electrode to earth . 

2.41 Earth Fault Loop Impedance — The 

impedance of the earth fault current loop ( phase 
to earth loop ) starting and ending at the point of 
earth fault. 

2.42 Earth Leakage Current — A current 
which flows to earth, or to extraneous conductive 
parts, in a circuit which is electrically sound . 

Note — This current may have a capacitive com- 
ponent including that resulting from the deliberate 
use of capacitors. 

2.43 Earthing Resistance, Total — The resis- 
tance between the main earthing terminal and 
the earth. 

2.44 Earthed Concentric Wiring — A wiring 
system in which one or more insulated conduc- 
tors are completely surrounded throughout their 
length by a conductor, for example a sheath, 
which acts as a PEN conductor. 

2.45 Earthing Conductor— -A protective conduc- 
tor connecting the main earth terminal ( or 
equipotential bonding conductor of an installation 
when there is no earth bus ) to an earth elec- 
trode or to other means of earthing. 

2.46 Electric Shock — A dangerous patho- 
physiological effect resulting from the passing of 
an electric current through a human body or an 
animal. 

2.47 Electrical Equipment ( abb: Equip- 
ment ) — Any item for such purposes as genera- 
tion, conversion, transmission, distribution or 
utilization of electrical energy, such as machines, 
transformers, apparatus, measuring instruments, 
protective devices, wiring materials, accessories, 
and appliances. 

2.48 Electrical Installation (of a Building) — 

An assembly of associated electrical equipment to 
fulfil a specific purpose or purposes and having 
coordinated characteristics. 

2.49 Electrically Independent Earth Elec- 
trodes — Earth electrodes located at such a 
distance from one another that the maximum 
current likely to flow through one of them does 
not significantly affect the potential of the 
other (s), 

2.50 Electrode Boiler (or Electrode Water 
Heater ) — Equipment for the electrical heating 
of water or electrolyte by the passage of an 
electric current between electrodes immersed in 
the water or electrolyte. 

2.51 Emergency Switching — Rapid cutting 
off of electrical energy to remove any hazard to 
persons, livestock, or property which may occur 
unexpectedly. 



2.52 Enclosure — A part providing protection of 
equipment againstc ertain external influences and, 
in any direction, protection against direct contact. 

2.53 Equipment — See 2.47. 

2.54 Equipotential Bonding — Electrical con- 
nection putting various exposed conductive parts 
and extraneous conductive parts at a substantially 
equal potential. 

Note — In a bui Iding installation equipotential 
bonding conductors shall interconnect the following 
conductive parts: 

a) Protective conductor, 

b) Earth continuity conductor, and 

c) Risers of air-conditioning system and beating 
systems ( if any ). 

2.55 Exposed Conductive Part — A conductive 
part of electrical equipment, which can be touched 
and which is not normally live, but which may 
become live under fault conditions. 

2.56 External Influence — Any influence exter- 
nal to an electrical installation which affects the 
design and safe operation of that installation. 

2.57 Extraneous Conductive Part — A con- 
ductive part not forming part of the electrical 
installation and liable to introduce a potential, 
generally the earth potential. 

2.58 Factory Built Assembly ( of LV Switch- 
gear and Controlgear ) — See IS : 862 (Part 1)- 
1977*. 

2.59 Final Circuit — A circuit connected direct- 
ly to current using equipment, or to a socket 
outlets or other outlet points for the connection of 
such equipment. 

2.60 Fixed Equipment — Equipment fastened 
to a support or otherwise secured. 

2.61 Functional Earthing — Connection to 
earth necessary for proper functioning of electrical 
equipment. 

2.62 Fuse Element — A part of a fuse designed 
to melt when the fuse operates. 

2.63 Fuse Link — A part of fuse, including the 
fuse element (s), which requires replacement by a 
new or renewable fuse link after the fuse has 
operated and before the fuse is put back into 
service. 

2.64 Hand-Held Equipment — Portable equip- 
ment intended to be held in the hand during 
normal use, in which the motor, if any, forms an 
integral part of the equipment. 

Note — A hand-held equipment is an item of 
equipment, the functioning of which requires constant 
manual support or guidance. 



* Specification for factory built assemblies of switchgear 
and controlgear for voltages upto and including 1 000 volt 
ac and 1 200 volt dc: Part 1 General requirements. 



IS: 732 -1989 



2.65 Indirect Contact — Contact of persons or 
livestock with exposed conductive parts made live 
by a fault and which may result in electric shock. 

2.66 Installations — See 2.48. 

2.67 Insulating Floor ( or Wall ) — A floor 
( or wall ) such that, in the event of direct con- 
tact with a live part, a person standing on the 
floor ( or touching the wall ) cannot be traversed 
by a shock current flowing to the floor (or wall). 

2.68 Insulation — Suitable non-conductive mate- 
rial enclosing surrounding, or supporting a 
conductor. 

Note — See alio the definitions for basic insulation, 
double insulation, reinforced insulation and supplemen- 
tary insulation. 

2.69 Isolation — Cutting off an electrical instal- 
lation, a circuit, or an item of equipment from 
every source of electrical energy. 

2.70 Live Part — A conductor or conductive 
part intended to be energised in normal use 
including a neutral conductor but, by convention, 
not a PEN conductor. 

2.71 Luminaire — Equipment which distributes 
filters or transforms the light from one or more 
lamps, and which includes any parts necessary 
for supporting, fixing and protecting the lamps, 
but not the lamps themselves, and, where nece- 
ssary, circuit auxiliaries together with the means 
for connecting them to the supply. 

Note — For the purposes of this code a batten 
lampholder, or a lampholder suspended by flexible 
cord, is a luminaire. 

2.72 Main Earthing Terminal — The terminal 
or bar which is the equipotential bonding conduc- 
tor of protective conductors, and conductors for 
functional earthing, if any, to the means of earth- 
ing- 

2.73 Mechanical Maintenance — The replace- 
ment, refurbishment or cleaning of lamps and 
non-electrical parts of equipment, plant and 
machinery. 

2.74 Neutral Conductor ( Symbol N ) — A 
conductor connected to the neutral point of a 
system and capable of contributing to the trans- 
mission of electrical energy. 

2.75 Nominal Voltage — See 2.109. 

2.76 Obstacle — A part preventing unintentional 
contact with live parts but not preventing delibe- 
rate contact. 

2.77 Origin of an Electrical Installation — 

The point at which electrical energy is delivered 
to an installation. 

Note — An electrical installation may have more 
than one origin. 



2.78 Overcurrent — A current exceeding the 
rated value. For conductors the rated value is the 
current carrying capacity. 

2.79 Overcurrent Detection — A method of 
establishing that the value of current in a circuit 
exceeds a predetermined value for a specified 
length of time. 

2.80 Overload Current ( of a Circuit ) — An 

overcurrent occurring in a circuit in the absence 
of an electrical fault. 

2.81 PEN Conductor — A conductor combining 
the functions of both protective conductor and 
neutral conductor. 

2.82 Phase Conductor — A conductor of an ac 
system for the transmission of electrical energy, 
other than a neutral conductor. 

Note — The term also means the equivalent con- 
ductor of a dc system unless otherwise specified in this 
code. 

2.83 Plug — A device, provided with contact 
pins, which is intended to be attached to a flexible 
cable, and which can be engaged with a socket 
outlet or with a connector. 

2.84 Point ( in Wiring) — A termination of the 
fixed wiring intended for the connection of current 
using equipment. 

2.85 Portable Equipment — Equipment which 
is moved while in operation or which can easily 
be moved from one place to another while con- 
nected to the supply. 

2.86 Prospective Touch Voltage — The 

highest touch voltage liable to appear in the event 
of a fault of negligible impedance in the electrical 
installation. 

2.87 Protective Conductor — A conductor used 
for some measures of protection against electric 
shock and intended for connecting together any of 
the following parts: 

a) Exposed conductive parts, 

b) Extraneous conductive parts, 

c) The main earthing terminal, and 

d) The earthed point of the source, or an 
artificial neutral. 

2.88 Reinforced Insulation — Single insulation 
applied to live parts, which provides a degree of 
protection against electric shock equivalent to 
double insulation under the conditions specified in 
the relevant standard. 

Note — The term 'single insulation* does not 
imply that the insulation must be one homogeneous 
piece. It may comprise several layers which cannot be 
tested singly as supplementary or basic insulation. 

2.89 Residual Current — The algebraic sum of 
the instantaneous values of current flowing through 
all live conductors of a circuit at a point of the 
electrical installation. 



10 



IS : 732 - 1989 



2.90 Residual Current Device ( RCD ) — A 

mechanical switching device or association of 
devices intended to cause the opening of the con- 
tacts when the residual current attains a given 
value under specified conditions. 

2.91 Residual Operating Current — Residual 
current which causes the residual current device 
to operate under specified conditions. 

2.92 Resistance Area (for an Earth Electrode 
only) — The surface area of ground ( around an 
earth electrode ) on which a significant voltage 
gradient may exist. 

2.93 Ring Final Circuit — A final circuit 
arranged in the form of a ring and connected to 
a single point of supply. 

2.94 Shock Current — A current passing through 
the body of a person or an animal and having 
characteristics likely to cause dangerous pathophy- 
siological effects. 

2.95 Short -Circuit Current — An overcurrent 
resulting from a fault of negligible impedance be- 
tween live conductors having a difference in 
potential under normal operating conditions. 

2.96 Simultaneously Accessible Parts — Con- 
ductors or conductive parts which can be touched 
simultaneously by a person or, where applicable 
by livestock. 

Note — In the context of protection against direct 
contacts a live part may be accessible with: 

a) another live part, or 

b) an exposed conductive part, or 

c) an extraneous conductive part, or 

d) a protective conductor. 

The following may constitute simultaneously 
accessible parts in the context of protection 
against indirect contacts: 

a) Exposed conductive parts, 

b) Extraneous conductive parts, and 

c) Protective conductors. 

It should be noted that the word touched 
signifies any contact with any part of the body 
( hand, foot, head, etc ). 

2.97 Socket Outlet — A device, provided with 
female contacts, which is intended to be installed 
with the fixed wiring, and intended to receive a 
plug. 

Note — A luminaire track system is not regarded 
as a socket outlet system. 

2.98 Space Factor — The ratio ( expressed as a 
percentage ) of the sum of the overall cross- 
sectional areas of cables (including insulation and 
sheath ) to the internal cross-sectional area of the 
conduit or other cable enclosure in which they 
are installed. The effective overall cross-sectional 
area of a non-circular cable is taken as that of a 



circle of diameter equal to the major axis of the 
cable. 

2.99 Spur — A branch cable connected to a ring 
or radial final circuit. 

2*100 Standby Supply System — A system 
intended to maintain supply to the installation or 
part thereof, in case of interruption of the normal 
supply, for reasons other than safety of persons.' 

Note — Standby supplies are necessary, for exam- 
ple, to avoid interruption of continuous industrial 
processes or data processing. 

2.101 Stationary Equipment — Either fixed 
equipment or equipment not .provided with a 
carrying handle and having such a mass that it 
cannot easily be moved. 

2.102 Supplementary Insulation — Indepen- 
dent insulation applied in addition to basic 
insulation in order to provide protection against 
electric shock in the event of a failure of basic 
insulation. 

2.103 Switch — A mechanical switching device 
capable of making, carrying and breaking current 
under normal circuit conditions, which may 
include specified operating overload conditions, 
and also of carrying for a specified time currents 
under specified abnormal circuit conditions such 
as those of short circuit. 

Note — A switch may also be capable of making, 
but not breaking, short-circuit currents. 

2.104 Switch, Linked — A switch the contacts 
of which are so arranged as to make or break all 
poles simultaneously or in a definite sequence. 

2.105 Switchboard — An assembly of switchgear 
with or without instruments, but the term does not 
apply to a group of local switches in a final 
circuit. 

Note — The term 'switchboard' includes a distri- 
bution board. 

2.106 Switchgear — An assembly of main and 
auxiliary switching apparatus for operation, regu- 
lation, protection or other control of electrical 
installations. 

Note — For more comprehensive definitions of the 
terms in 2.103 to 2.106 ( set IS : 1885 ( Part 17 )-1987*. 

2.107 System — An electrical system consisting 
of a single source of electrical energy and an 
installation. 

Note — The types of systems depending upon the 
relationship to the source and of the exposed conductive 
parts of the installation to earth are defined in 
IS : 3043-1987T. 

2.108 Touch Voltage — The potential difference 
between a grounded metallic structure and a point 

•Electrotechnical vocabulary: Part 17 Switchgear and 
controlgear (first revision ). 

tCode of practice for earthing. 



u 



IS: 732- 1989 



on the earths surface separated by a distance 
equal to the normal maximum horizontal reach 
approximately 1 metre. 



2.109 Voltage, Nominal (of an Installation) — 

Voltage by which an installation or part of an 
installation is designated. 



SECTION 2 ASSESSMENT OF GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF INSTALLATIONS 



3. ASSESSMENT OF CHARACTERISTICS 

3.0 An assessment shall be made of the following 
characteristics of the installation in accordance 
with the clauses indicated: 

a) The purpose for which the installation is 
intended to be used, its general structure, 
and its supplies (3.1 ); 

b) The external influences to which it is to be 
exposed ( 3.2 ); 

c) The compatibility of its equipment ( 3.3 ) ; 
and 

d) Its maintainability ( 3.4 ). 

These characteristics shall be taken into 
account in the choice of methods of protection 
for safety ( see Section 3 ) and the selection and 
erection of equipment ( see Section 4 ). 

3.1 Purposes, Supplies and Structure 

3.1.1 Maximum Demand — The maximum 
demand of the installation, expressed as a current 
value, shall be assessed. 

3.1.2 Diversity — In determining the maximum 
demand of an installation or parts thereof, diver- 
sity may be taken into account. 

3.1.3 Arrangement of Live Conductors and Type of 
Earthing 

3.1.3.1 General — The characteristics men- 
tioned in 3.1.3.2 and 3.1.3.3 shall be ascertained 
in order to determine which methods of protection 
for safety, will be appropriate. 

3.1.3.2 Number and types of live conductors — 
The number and types of live conductors ( for 
example single-phase two-wire ac, three-phase 
four-wire ac ) shall be assessed, both for the 
source of energy and for the circuits to be used 
within the installation. Where the source of 
energy is provided by a supply undertaking, that 
undertakings shall be consulted, if necessary. 

3.1.3.3 Types of earthing arrangement — The 
type of earthing arrangement or arrangements to 
be used for the installation shall be determined. 

3.1.4 Nature of Supply 

3.1.4.1 General — The following character- 
istics of the supply or supplies shall be ascertained 
for an external supply and shall be determined 
for a private source: 

a) Nominal voltage(s); 

b) Nature of current and frequency; 



c) Prospective short-circuit current at the 
origin of the installation; 

d) Type and rating of the overcurrent protec- 
tive device acting at the origin of the 
installation; 

e) Suitability for the requirements of the 
installation, including the maximum 
demand; and 

f) The earth loop impedance of that part of 
the system external to the installation. 

Note — As regards item (f), it may only be possi- 
ble to ascertain an expected maximum value. 

3.1.4.2 Supplies for safety services and standby 
purposes — Where a supply for safety services or 
standby purposes is specified, the characteristics 
of the sources of any such supply shall be assessed. 
Such supplies shall have adequate capacity, relia- 
bility and rating and appropriate changeover 
time for the operation specified. 

Where the normal source of energy is to be 
provided by a supply undertaking, the supply 
undertaking shall be consulted regarding switching 
arrangements for safety and standby supplies, 
especially where the various sources are intended 
to operate in parallel. 

Note — For further requirements for supplies for 
safety services ste 3.4. 

3.1.5 Installation Circuit Arrangements 

3.1.5.1 Every installation shall be divided 
into circuits as necessary to: 

a) avoid danger and minimise inconvenience 
in the event of a fault, and 

b) facilitate safe operation, inspection, testing, 
and maintenance. 

3.1.5.2 Separate circuits shall be provided 
for parts of the installation which need to be 
separately controlled, in such a way that these 
circuits are not affected by failure of other 
circuits. 

3.1.5.3 The number of final circuits requi- 
red, and the number of points supplied by any 
final circuit, shall be such as to comply with the 
requirements for overcurrent protection, for isola- 
tion and switching, and as regards current- 
carrying capacities of conductors. 

3.1.5.4 Where an installation comprises 
more than one final circuit, each final circuit shall 
be connected to a separate way in a distribution 
board. The wiring of each final circuit shall be 



12 



IS i 732 -1989 



-electrically separate from that of every other final 
circuit, so as to prevent indirect energisation of a 
final circuit intended to be isolated. 

3.2 Compatibility 

3.2.1 An assessment shall be made of any 
characteristics, pi equipment likely to have harmful 
effects upon other electrical equipment or other 
services, or likely to impair the supply. The 
characteristics include, for example: 

a) transient overvoltages; 

b) rapidly fluctuating loads; 

c) starting currents; 

d) harmonic currents ( such as with .fluores- 
cent lighting loads and thyristor drives ); 

e) mutual inductance; 

f) dc feedback; 

g) high frequency oscillations; 

h) earth leakage currents; and 

j) any need for additional connections to 
earth ( for example, for equipment needing 
a connection with earth independent of 
the main means of earthing of the installa- 
tion, for the avoidance of interference with 
its operation ). 

Note — For an external source of energy it is 
essential that the supply undertaking be consulted 
regarding any equipment of the installation having a 
characteristic likely to have a significant influence on 
the supply, for example, having heavy starting 
currents. 

3.3 Maintainability 

3.3.1 An assessment shall be made of the fre- 
quency and quality of maintenance that the ins- 
tallation can reasonably be expected to receive 
during its intended life. This assessment shall, 
wherever practicable, include consultation with 
the person or body who will be responsible for 
the operation and maintenance of the installation. 
Having regard to the frequency and quality of 
maintenance expected, the requirements of this 
-Code shall be applied so that: 

a) any periodic inspection, testing, mainten- 
ance and repairs likely to be necessary 
during the intended life can be readily 
and sefely carried out; 

b) the protective measures for safety remain 
effective during the intended life; and 

c) the reliability of equipment is appropriate 
to the intended life. 

3.4 Supplies for Safety Services 

Note — The need for safety services and their 
nature are frequently regulated by statutory authorities 
whose requirements have to be observed. 

3.4,1 General — The following sources for 
safety services are recognized: 

a) storage batteries, 

b) primary cells, 



c) generator sets independent of the normal 
supply, and 

d) a separate feeder effectively independent 
of the normal feeder. 

Note — The uss of separate independent feeders 
should be based on an assessment that the two supplies 
are unlikely to fail concurrently. 

3.4.2 Classification — A safety service is either: 

a non-automatic supply, the starting of 
which is initiated by an operator, or 

an automatic supply, the starting oi 
which is independent of an operator. 

An automatic supply is classified according to 
changeover time: 

a) no-break — an automatic supply which can 
ensure a continuous supply within specified 
conditions during the period of transition, 
for example, as regards variations in volt- 
age and frequency; 

b) very short break: an automatic supply avail- 

able within 0*15 second; 

c) short break; an automatic supply available 

within 0-5 second; 

d) medium break: an automatic supply avail- 

able within 15 seconds; and 

e) long break: an automatic supply available in 

more than 15 seconds. 

4. EXTERNAL INFLUENCES 

4.1 Identification of External Influences on 
the Electrical Installation 

4.1.1 The characteristics of the following 
external influences shall be assessed: 

1) Environments 

a) Ambient temperature, 

b) Atmospheric humidity, 

c) Altitude, 

d) Presence of water, 

e) Presence of foreign solid bodies, 

f) Presence of corrosive or polluting subs- 
tances, 

g) Mechanical stresses, 

h) Presence of flora and/or mould growth, 

j) Presence of fauna, 

k) Electromagnetic, electrostatic or ionizing 
influences, 

m) Solar radiation, 

n) Seismic effects, 

p) Lightning, and 

q) Wind. 

2) Utilization 

a) Capability of persons, 

b) Electrical resistance of human body, 



13 



IS j 732 - 1989 



c) Contact of persons with earth potential, 

d) Conditions of evacuation in an emergency, 
and 

e) Nature of processed or stored material. 

3) Construction of Buildings 

a) Constructional materials, and 

b) Building design. 

4.1.2 Table 1 suggests the classification and 
codification of external influences which require 
assessment in the design and erection of electrical 
installation. 

Note 1 — Each condition of external influence is 
designated by a code comprising a group of two capital 
letters and a number as follows: 

The first letter relates to the general category of external 
influence ; 

A = environment 

B =* utilization 

C = construction of buildings 

The second Utter relates to the nature of the external 
influence: 

A... 

B... 

C... 

The number relates to the class within each external 

influence : 

1... 

2... 

3... 

For example, the code AC 2 signifies: 

A ■= environment 

AC = environment altitude 

AC2 = environment altitude > 2 000 m. 

The code given here is not intended to be used for 
marking equipment. 

Note 2 — The characteristics denned for electrical 
installations are those accepted by the IEC and as 
applicable for electrical installations in buildings. 
Influences on outdoor installations are separately defi- 
ned in the respective parts of the Code. 



For the time being, the characteristics of influences. 
( col 2, Table 1 ) are given in descriptive language 
only. Codification for the same ( see Note 1 above ), 
as recommended by IEC are given in col 4 for infor- 
mation. It is hoped that in due course the users of the 
Code would be familiar with the codification in terms 
of which the requirements would be stated in future 
editions. 

4.2 Compatibility — An assessment shall be 
made of any characteristics of equipment likely 
to have harmful effects upon other electrical, 
equipment or other services or likely to impair 
the supply. Those characteristics include, for 
example: 

a) transient overvoltages, 

b) rapidly fluctuating loads, 

c) starting currents, 

d) harmonic currents, 

e) dc feedback, 

f ) high-frequency oscillations, and 

g) earth leakage currents. 

4.3 Maintainability — An assessment shall be 
made of the frequency and quality of mainten- 
ance the installation can reasonably be expected 
to receive, during its intended life. Where an 
authority is to be responsible for the operation of 
the installation, that authority shall be consulted. 
Those characteristics are to be taken into account 
in applying the requirements of this code so that, 
having regard to the frequency and quality of 
maintenance expected: 

a) any periodic inspection and testing and 
maintenance and repairs likely to be 
necessary during the intended life can be 
readily and safely carried out, 

b) the effectiveness of the protective measures 
for safety during the intended life is ensur- 
ed, and 

c) the reliability of equipment for proper func- 
tioning of the installation is appropriate to 
the intended life. 



14 



IS : 732 - 1989 



TABLE 1 ASSESSMENT OF GENERAL CHARARCTERISTICS OF BUILDINGS 

(Clause 4.1.2) 



-Class Designation 
(I) 

1) Ambient 

temperature 



CHARACTERISTICS 

(2) 

Environment 

The ambient temperature to be 
considered for the equipment is 
the temperature at the place 
where the equipment is to be 
installed resulting from the 
influence of all other equipment 
in the same location, when 
operating, not taking into acco- 
unt the thermal contribution of 
the equipment to be installed. 

Lower and upper limits of ranges 
of ambient temperature: 



-60°C 


+5*C 


-40°C 


+5 e G 


-25°C 


+ 5°C 


-5"C 


+40*0 


+ 5°C 


+ 40*0 


+ 5°G 


+60°G 



2) Atmospheric 

humidity 

3) Altitude 

4) Presence of water 

Negligible 



Free-falling 
drops 



Sprays 
Splashes 

Jets 

Waves 
Immersion 

Submersion 



The average temperature over a 
24 hour period must not exceed 
5°C below the upper limits. 

Combination of two ranges to 
define some environments may 
be necessary. Installations sub- 
ject to temperatures outside 
the ranges require special con- 
sideration. 

under consideration 

< 2 000 m 
> 2 000 m 

Probability of presence of water is 
negligible 



Possibility of vertically falling 
drops 



Possibility of water falling as spray 
at an angle up to 60°C from the 
vertical 

Possibility of splashes from any 
direction 



Possibility of jets of water from 
any direction 

Possibility of water waves 

Possibility of intermittent partial 
or total covering by water 



Possibility of permanent and total 
covering by water 



Application and Examples 
(3) 



Locations in which the walls do not 
genernlly show traces of water 
but may do so for short periods, 
for example, in the form of 
vapour which good ventilation 
dries rapidly 

Locations in which water vapour 
occasionally condenses as drops 
or where steam may occasionally 
be present 

Locations in which sprayed water 
forms a continuous film on floors 
and/or walls 

Locations where equipment may be 
subjected to splashed water, this 
applies, for example, to certain 
external lighting fittings, constru- 
ction site equipment, etc. 

Locations where bosewater is used 
regularly ( yards, car-washing 
bays ) 

Seashore locations such as piers, 
beaches, quays, etc. 

Location) which may be flooded and/ 
or where water may be at least 
150 mm above the highest point 
of equipment, the lowest part of 
equipment being not more than 
1 m below the water surface 

Locations such as swimming pools 
where electrical equipment is per- 
manently and totally covered with 
water under a pressure greater 
than 0*1 bar 



Cobb 
(4) 



AA1 

AA2 
AA3 
AA4 
AA5 
AA6 



AC1 
AC2 

AD1 



AD2 

AD3 
AD4 

AD5 

ADS 
AD7 

AD8 

( Continued ) 



15 



IS : 732 - 1989 



TABLE 1 ASSESSMENT OF GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF BUILDINGS — Contd 



Class Designation 

(J) 
5) Presence of foreign 
solid bodies: 



Characteristics 
(2) 



Negligible 



Small Objects 



Very small 
objects 



6) 



Dust 

Presence of 
corrosive or pol- 
luting subtances: 

Negligible 



Atmospheric 



The quantity of nature of dust or 
foreign solid bodies is not signi- 
ficant 

Presence of foreign solid bodies 
where the smallest dimension is 
not less than 2*5 mm 

Presence of foreign solid bodies 
where the smallest dimension 
is not less than 1 mm 

Note — In conditions AEI 
and AE3, dust may be present 
but is not significant to operation 
of the electrical equipment 

Presence of dust is significant 
quantity 



Intermittent 
or accidental 



The quantity or nature of corrosive 
or polluting substances is not 
significant 

The presence of corrosive or 
polluting substance of atmos- 
pheric origin is significant 



Intermittent or accidental subjec- 
tion to corrosive or polluting 
chemical substances being used 
or produced 



Continuous 



Continuously subject to corrosive 
or polluting chemical subs- 
tances in substantial quantity 



7) Mechanical Stresses: 
a) Impact 

Low severity 
Medium severity 
High severity 



Note — Provisional classifi- 
cation. Quantitative expression 
of impact severities is under 
consideration 



b) Vibration 
Low severity 

Medium severity 
High severity 



Note — Provisional classifi- 
cation. Quantitative expression 
of vibration severities is under 
consideration 



Applications and Examples 

(3) 



Tools and small objects are exam- 
ples of foreign solid bodies of 
which the smallest dimension is 
at least 2*5 mm 

Wires are examples of foreign solid 
bodies of which the smallest 
dimension is not less than 1 mm. 



Installations situated by the sea or 
industrial zones producing serious 
atmospheric pollution, such as 
chemical works and cement 
works; this type of pollution arises 
especially in the production of 
abrasive, insulating or conductive 
dusts 

Locations where some chemical 
products are handled in small 
quantities and where these pro- 
ducts may come only accidentally 
into contact with electrical equip- 
ment; such conditions are found 
in factory, laboratories, other 
laboratories, or in locations where 
hydro-carbons are used ( boiler- 
rooms, garages, etc ). 

For example, chemical works 



Household and similar conditions 
Usual industrial conditions 
Severe industrial conditions 



Household and similar conditions 
where the effects of vibration are 
generally negligible 

Usual industrial conditions 

Industrial installations subject to 
severe conditions 



Code 
(4> 

AEI 

AE2 

AE3 



AE4 



AF1 



AP2 



AF3 



AF4 



AG1 
AG2 
AG3 



AH1 

AH2 
AH3 



( Continued ) 



16 



IS t 732 • 7989 



TABLE 1 ASSESSMENT OF GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF BUILDINGS — Contd 



Class Designation 

(1) 
c) Other mechanical 
stresses 

8) Presence of fungus 
and/or mould growth: 

No hazard 
Hazard 



9) Presence of vermin: 
No hazard 
Hazard 



10) Electromagnetic, 
electrostatic or 
ionizing influences: 

Negligible 



Stray currents 
Electromagnetics 

Ionization 

Electrostatics 

Induction 

11) Solar radiation 

Negligible 
Significant 

12) Seismic effects 

Negligible 
Low severity 

Medium severity 

High severity 



Characteristics 

(2) 



No hazard of fungus and/or mould 
growth 



hazard of fungus 
growth 



No hazard 



and/or mould 



Hazard from fauna ( insects, birds, 
small animals ) 



No harmful effects from stray 
currents, electromagnetic radia- 
tion, electrostatic fields, ionizing 
radiation or induction 

Harmful hazards of stray currents 
Harmful presence of electromag- 
netic radiation 

Harmful presence of ionizing 
radiation 

Harmful presence of electrostatic 

fields 

Harmful presence of induced 
currents 



Solar radiation of harmful intensity 
and /or duration 



Up to 30 Gal ( I Gal = 1 cm/si ) 

Over 30 up to and including 300 
Gal 

Over 300 up to and including 600 
Gal 

Greater than 600 Gal 



Applications and Examples 

(3) 
Under consideration 



The hazard depends on local condi- 
tions and the nature of fungus. 
Distinction should be made be- 
tween harmful growth of vegeta- 
tion or conditions for promotion 
of mould growth 



The hazard. depends on the nature 
of the vermin. Distinction should 
be made between: 

— presence of insects in harmful 
quantity or of an aggressive 
nature 

— presence of small animals or 
birds in harmful quantity or of 
an aggressive nature 



Vibration which may cause the 
destruction of the building is out- 
side the classification 

Frequency is not taken into account 
in <he classification; however, if 
the seismic wave resonates with 
the building, seismic effects must 
be specially considered. In 
general, the frequency of seismic 
acceleration is between and 
10 Hz 



Code 
(4) 
AJ 



AK1 

AK2 



ALl 
AL2 



AMI 

AM2 

AM3 

AM4 
AM5 

AM6 

AN1 
AN2 

API 
AP2 

AP3 

AP4 



Continued 



17 



IS i 732 - 1989 



TABLE 1 ASSESSMENT OF GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF BUILDINGS — Contd 



Class Designation 

(1) 
13) Lightning 
Negligible 

Indirect 
exposure 

Direct exposure 



Characteristics 
(2) 



Hazard from supply arrangements 

Hazard from exposure of equip- 
meat 



14) Wind 

(Under consideration) 

1) Capability of persons 
Ordinary 
Children 



Handicapped 



Instructed 



Skilled 



Frequent 
Continuous 



4) Condition! of 
evacuation in 
an emergency 



Applications and Examples 
(3) 



Installations supplied by overhead 
lines 

Farts of installations located outside 
buildings. The risks AQ.2 and 
AQ,3 relate to regions with a parti- 
cularly high level of thunderstorm 
activity 



Code 
(4) 

AQ1 
AQ.2 

AQ.3 



2) Electrical resistance 
of the human body 

Classification (Under 
consideration) 

3) Contact of Persons 

with earth potential 

None 
Low 



Utilization 

Uninstructed peisons 

Children in locations intended for 
their occupation 

Nom — This class does not 
necessarily apply to family 
dwellings 
Persons not in command of all 
their physical and intellectual 
abilities ( sick persons, old 
persons ) 
Persons adequately advised or 
supervised by skilled persons to 
enable them to avoid dangers 
which electricity may create 
( operating and maintenance 
staff) 

Persons with technical knowledge 
or sufficient experience to enable 
them to avoid dangers which 
electricity may create ( engi- 
neers and technicians ) 



Nurseries 



Hospitals 



Electrical operating areas 



Closed electrical operating areas 



BA1 
BA2 



BA3 



BA4 



BA5 



in non-conducting situa- Non-conducting locations 



Persons 
tions 

Persons do not in usual conditions 
make contact with extraneous 
conductive parts or stand on con- 
ducting surfaces 

Persons are frequently in touch 
with extraneous conductive parts 
or stand on conducting surfaces 

Persons are in permanent contact 
with metallic surroundings and 
for whom the possibility of inter- 
rupting contact is limited 



Low density occupation, easy con- 
ditions of evacuation 

Low density occupation, difficult 
conditions of evacuation 

High density occupation, easy 
conditions of evacuation 

High density occupation, difficult 
conditions of evacuation 



Locations with extraneous conductive 
parts, eitter numerous or of large 
area 

Metallic surroundings such as boi- 
lers and tanks 



Buildings of normal or low height 
used fo r habitation 



BB 

BC1 
BC2 

BC3 
BC4 



High-rise buildings 



public 



Locations open to the 
( theatres, cinemas ) 

High-rise buildings open to the 
public ( hotels, hospitals, etc ) 



BD1 
BD2 
BD3 
BD4 

( Continued ) 



18 







18 1 


732 - 1989 


TABLE 1 ASSESSMENT OF GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF BUILDINGS — Contd 




Class Dxsionatios 


Chajbaotkbjbtics 


Applications and Examples 


Cods 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


5) Nature of processed 
or stored materials 








No significant risks 


— 


— 


BE1 


Fire risks 


Manufacture, processing or storage 
of flunni^e materials including 
presence of dust 


Barns, wood -working shops, paper 
factories 


BE2 


Explosion risk 


Processing or storage of explosive 
or low flashpoint materials 
including presence of explosive 
dusts 


Oil refineries, hydrocarbon stores 


BE3 


Contamination 
risks 


Presence of unprotected foodstuffs, 
pharmaceutics, and similar pro- 


Foodstuff industries, kitchens 


BE4 



ducts without protection 



Construction a of Building 



1) Constructional 

materials 
Non-combustible 
Combustible 

2) Building design 

Negligible risk 
Propagation of fire 



Movement 



Flexible or 
unstable 



Buildings mainly constructed of 
combustible materials 



Buildings of which the shape and 
dimensions facilitate the spread 
of fire (for example, chimney 
effects ) 

Risks due to structaral movement 
(for example, displacement be- 
tween a building and the ground, 
or settlement of ground or build- 
ing foundations ) 

Structures which are weak or sub- 
jects to movement ( for example, 
oscillation ) 



Notx — Certain precautions 
may be necessary, in the event of 
fault, to prevent processed 
materials being contaminated by 
electrical equipment, for exam- 
ple, by broken lamps 



Wooden buildings 



High-rise buildings, forced ventila- 
tion systems 



Buildings of considerable length or 
erected on unstable ground 

Contraction or expansion joints 

Tents, air-support structures, false 
ceilings, removable partitions 

Flexible wiring, installations needing 
support 



CA1 
CA2 

CB1 
CB2 



CB3 



CB4 



SECTION 3 PROTECTION FOR SAFETY 



5. REQUIREMENTS 
FOR SAFETY 



FOR PROTECTION 



5.0 Fundamental Requirements for Safety — 

The requirements for protection for safety of 
persons, livestock and property involve protection 
against electric shock, thermal effects, overcurrent, 
overvoltage and undervoltage and a measure of 
isolation and switching of electric circuits. The 
protective measures may be applicable to the 
entire installation or a part or an item of equip- 
ment. The requirements stated below in this 
Section are based on the following basic princi- 
ples. 

5.0.1 Protection Against Direct Contact — Persons 
and livestock shall be protected against dangers 
that may arise from contact with live parts of the 
installation. 



This protection can be achieved by one of the 
following methods: 

a) Preventing a current from passing through 
the body of any person or any livestock; 
and 

b) Limiting the current which can pass thro- 
ugh a body to a value lower than the shock 
current. 

5.0.2 Protection Against Indirect Contact — Per- 
sons and livestock shall be protected against 
dangers that may arise from contact with exposed 
conductive parts. 

This protection can be achieved by one of the 
following methods: 

a) Preventing a fault current from passing 
through the body of any person or any 
livestock; 



19 



IS : 732 - 1989 

b) Limiting the fault current which can pass 
through a body to a value lower than the 
shock current; and 

c) Automatic disconnection of the supply on 
the occurrence of a fault likely to cause a 
current to flow through a body in contact 
with exposed conductive parts, where the 
value of that current is equal to or greater 
than the shock current. 

5.0.3 Protection Against Thermal Effects in Normal 
Service — The electrical installation shall be so 
arranged that there is no risk of melting besides 
ignition of flammable materials due to high tem- 
perature or electric arc. Also during normal 
operation of the electrical equipment, there shall 
be no risk of persons or livestock suffering burns. 

5.0.4 Protection Against Overcurrent — Persons or 
livestock shall be protected against injury and 
property shall be protected against damage due to 
excessive temparatures or electromechanical 
stresses caused by any overcurrents likely to arise 
in live conductors. 

This protection can be achieved by one of the 
following methods: 

a) Automatic disconnection on the occurrence 
of an overcurrent before this overcurrent 
attains a dangerous value taking into 
account its duration; and 

b) Limiting the maximum overcurrent to a 
safe value and duration. 

5.0.4.1 Overcurrent protection devices — Where 
necessary to^ prevent danger, every installation 
and every circuit thereof shall be protected against 
overcurrent by devices which: 

a) will operate automatically at values of 
current which are suitably related to the 
safe current ratings of the circuit; 

b) are of adequate breaking capacity and, 
where appropriate, making capacity; and 

c) are suitably located and are constructed so 
as to prevent danger from overheating, 
arcing or the scattering of hot particles 
when they come into operation and to 
permit ready restoration of the supply with- 
out danger. 

Note — Where the supply undertaking pro- 
vides switchgear or fusegear at the origin of the 
installation it may not be necessary to duplicate 
the means of overcurrent protection for that part 
of the installation between its origin and the main 
distribution point of the installation where the 
next step for overcurrent protection is provided. 
In domestic installations the protection and isolat- 
ing functions are combined in the same device. 

5.0.5 Protection Against Fault Currents — Conduc- 
tors, other than live conductors, and any other 
parts intended to carry a fault current shall be 



capable of carrying that current without assuming 
excessive temperature, until the protective gear 
operates. 

Note 1 — Particular attention should be given to 
earth fault currents. 

Note 2 — For live conductors, compliance with 5 
assures their protection against any fault currents, 
including overcurrents. 

5.0.5.1 Precautions against earth leakage and 
earth fault currents — Where metalwork of electrical 
equipment, other than current-carrying conduc- 
tors, may become charged with electricity in such 
a manner as to cause danger if the insulation of a 
conductor should become defective or if a fault 
should occur in any equipment: 

a) the metalwork shall be earthed in such a 
manner as will cause discharge of electrical 
energy without danger, or 

b) other equally effective precautions shall be 

taken to prevent danger. 

Every circuit shall be arranged so as to prevent 
the persistence of dangerous earth leakage 
currents. 

Where metalwork is earthed, the circuits 
concerned shall be protected against the persis- 
tence of dangerous earth fault currents by: 

a) the overcurrent protective devices required 
by 5.0.4.1, or 

b) a residual current operated device or 
equally effective device. 

The method described in (b) above shall be 
used whenever the prospective earth fault current 
is insufficient to cause prompt operation of the 
overcurrent protective devices. 

Where necessary to prevent danger and where 
metalwork of electrical equipment is earthed for 
compliance with (a) above and is accessible 
simultaneously with substantial exposed metal 
parts of other services, the latter parts shall be 
effectively connected to the main earthing termi- 
nal of the installation. 



5.0.6 Protection Against Overvoltage — Persons or 
livestock shall be protected against injury and 
property shall be protected against any harmful 
effects of a fault between live parts of circuits 
supplied at different voltages. 

Persons or livestock shall be protected against 
injury and property shall be protected against 
damage from any excessive voltages likely to arise 
due to other causes ( for example, atmospheric 
phenomena or switching voltages ). 



20 



IS * 732 - 1989 



SECTION 3A PROTECTION AGAINST ELECTRIC SHOCK 



5.1 Requirements 
Electric ShpcJ« 



for Protection Against 



5.1.1 Protection Against Both Direct and Indirect 
Contact 

5J.1.1 General ■+- 'One of the following basic 
protective measures for protection against both 
direct contact and indirect contact shall be used: 

a) Protection by safety extra low voltage, 

b) Protection by functional extra low voltage, 
and 

c) Protection by limitation of discharge of 
energy. 

5.1.1.2 Protection by safety extra low voltage — 
Protection against electric shock is provided when 
all the following requirements are fulfilled: 

a) The nominal voltage of the circuit concer- 
ned does not exceed extra low voltage. 

b) The supply is from one of the safety sources 
listed in (I) below. 

c) The conditions of (2) below are fulfilled. 

Note — Lower voltage limits may be required 
for certain conditions of external influences. 

1) Safety sources — The safety source shall be 
one of the following: 

i) A class II safety isolating transformer, 
the secondary-winding being isolated 
from earth. 

ii) A source of current providing a degree 
of safety equivalent to that of the safety 
isolating transformer specified in (a) 
above ( for example, a motor generator 
with windings providing equivalent 
isolation ). 
iii) An electrochemical source ( for exam- 
ple, a battery ) or another source 
independent of a higher voltage circuit 
( for example, a engine-driven genera- 
tor ). 

iv) Electronic devices where measures have 
been taken so that even in the case of 
an internal fault the voltage at the out- 
going terminals cannot exceed extra 
low voltage. 

2) Arrangement of Circuits 

i) Live parts of safety extra low voltage 
circuits shall not be connected to earth 
or to live parts or protective conductor 
forming part of other circuits. 

ii) Exposed conductive parts of safety 
extra low voltage circuits shall not 



intentionally be connected to any of 
the following: 

1) Earth, 

2) Protective conductors or exposed 
conductive parts of another system, 
or 

3) Extraneous conductive parts, except 
that where electrical equipment is 
inherently required to be connected 
to extraneous conductive parts it 
shall be verified that those parts can- 
not attain a voltage exceeding the 
limit of the safety extra low voltage 
circuit. If the exposed conductive 
parts of safety extra low voltage 
circuits are liable to come into con- 
tact fortuitously with exposed 
conductive parts of other circuits, 
the protection no longer depends 
solely on the measure for protection 
by safety extra low voltage and shall 
be in accordance with the require- 
ments for the measures applicable to 
the latter exposed conductive parts, 

iii) Live parts of safety extra low voltage 
equipment other than cables shall be 
electrically separate from those of 
higher voltage circuits. The electrical 
separation between live parts of safety 
extra low voltage circuits and higher 
voltage circuits shall be not less than 
that between the input and output 
windings of safety isolating transfor- 
mers. 

iv) Safety extra low voltage circuit conduc- 
tors shall preferably be physically 
separated from those of any other 
circuit. Where this requirement is im- 
practicable, one of the following 
arrangements is required: 

1 ) Safety extra low voltage circuit 
conductors shall be insulated in 
accordance with the requirements of 
this code for the highest voltage 
present. 

2) Safety extra low voltage circuit 
cables shall be non-metallic sheathed 
cables. 

3) Conductors of circuits at different 
voltages shall be separated from 
those at safety extra low voltage by 
an earthed metallic screen or an 
earthed metallic sheath. 

4) Circuits at different voltages may be 
contained in a multicore cable or 
other grouping of conductors but the 
conductors of safety extra low 



21 



IS t 732 - 1989 



voltage circuits shall be insulated, 
individually or collectively, for the 
highest voltage present. 

Notm — In arrangements (2) and (3) 
basic insulation of any conductor need be 
sufficient only for the voltage of the circuit 
of which it is a part. 

v) Plugs and socket outlets of safety extra 
low voltage circuits shall comply with 
all of the following requirements: 

1 ) The plugs shall not be capable of 
entering socket outlets of other 
voltage systems in use in the same 
premises. 

2) The socket outlets shall exclude 
plugs of other voltage systems in use 
in the same premises. 

3) The socket outlets shall not have a 
protective conductor connection. 

vi) Mobile safety sources shall be selected 
or erected in accordance with 5.1.3.2. 

vii) If the nominal voltage exceeds 25 V ac 
rms 50 Hz, or 60 V ripple-free dc, 
protection against direct contact shall 
be provided by one or more of the 
following: 

1) Barriers or enclosures affording at 
least the degree of protection IP 2X. 

2) Insulation capable of withstanding a 
test voltage 500 V dc for one minute. 

If the nominal voltage does not exceed 25 V ac 
rms 50 Hz, or 60 V ripple-free dc, protection 
against direct contact is not required by this code 
except as specified below: 

Application of Protective Measure — Safety 
extra-low voltage 

a) Where the use of safety extra-low voltage 
( SEL V ) is relied upon for protection against 
direct contact, that is, where live parts are not 
insulated or provided with barriers and enclosures 
in accordance with 5.1.1.2(2) (vii), the nominal 
voltage shall not in any event exceed 25 V rms ac 
or 60 V ripple-free dc. These voltage limits are 
applicable only to conditions where simultane- 
ously accessible parts may be touched by a person 
having a body resistance assumed as conven- 
tionally normal, and shall be appropriately reduced 
in conditions where reduced or very low body 
resistance is to be expected. 

b) Where SELV is used for protection against 
indirect contact only, and where the live parts of 
the SEL V circuit are insulated or provided with 
barriers and enclosures in accordance 
with 5. 1.1. 2 (2) (vii), the nominal voltage shall 
not in any event exceed 50 V rms ac or 120 V 
ripple-free dc. These voltage limits are applicable 
only to conditions where simultaneously accessible 



parts may be touched by a person having a con- 
ventionally normal body resistance, and shall be 
appropriately reduced in conditions where reduced 
or very low body resistance is to be expected. 

Note — Conventionally normal body resistance 
relates to a contact involving one hand and both 
feet, the skin being dry or moist with perspiration 
( but not wet). Reduced body resistance may be 
expected in situations where the hands and/or feet 
are likely to be wet or where the shock current 
path may not be through the extremities, and 
very low body resistance ( of the order of one 
quarter of the conventionally normal body resis- 
tance ) is to be expected in locations where a 
person is immersed in water or working in confined 
conductive locations. 

5.1.1.3 Functional extra low voltage systems 

a) If for functional reasons extra low voltage 
is used but not all the requirements 
of 5.1.1.2 regarding safety extra low voltage 
are fulfilled, the appropriate measures des- 
cribed in (b) to (e) below shall be taken in 
order to ensure protection against electric 
shock. Systems employing these measures 
are termed 'functional extra low voltage 
systems'. 

Note — Such conditions may, for example, be 
encountered in extra low voltage circuits when 
one point of the extra low voltage circuit is con- 
nected to earth or if the circuit contains compo- 
nents {such as transformers, relays, remote-control 
switches, contactors) insufficiently insulated with 
respect to circuits at higher voltages. 

b) If the extra low voltage system complies 
with the requirements ol 5.1.1.2 fpr safety 
extra low voltage except that live or 
exposed conductive parts are connected to 
earth or to the protective conductors of the 
systems [ see 5.1.1.2(b) (i) and (ii) ] protec- 
tion against direct contact shall be provided 
by one or more of the following: 

i) Enclosures giving protection at least 
equivalent to IP 2X. 

ii) Insulation capable for resisting a test 
voltage of 500 V rms for one minute. 

Such a system is connected to afford 
protection against indirect contact. 

This requirement does not exclude 
the installation or the use without 
supplementary protection of equipment 
conforming to the relevant standard, 
providing an equivalent degree of 
safety. 

c) If the extra low voltage system does not 
generally comply with the requirements of 
5.1.1 for safety extra low voltage, protec- 
tion against direct contact shall be provided 
by one or more of the following: 

i) Barriers or enclosures according 
to 5.1.2.2. 



22 



IS i 732 - »•» 



ii) Insulation corresponding to the mini- 
mum test voltage required for the 
primary circuit. 

In addition, protection against 
indirect contact shall be provided in 
accordance with (d) below. 

The extra low voltage circuit may be 
used to supply factory built equipment 
whose insulation does not comply with 
the minimum test voltage required for 
the primary circuit provided that the 
accessible insulation of that equipment 
is reinforced during erection to with- 
stand a test voltage of 1 500 V rms for 
one minute. 

d) If the primary circuit of the functional 
extra low voltage source is protected by 
automatic disconnection, exposed conduc- 
tive parts of the equipment in the function- 
al extra low voltage circuit shall be 
connected to the protective conductor of 
the primary circuit. 

Note — This does not exclude the possibility 
of connecting a conductor of the functional extra 
low voltage circuit to the protective conductor of 
the primary circuit. 

If the primary circuit of the functional 
extra low voltage source is protected by 
electrical separation, the exposed conduc- 
tive parts of equipment in the functional 
extra low voltage circuit shall be connected 
to the non-earthed protective conductor of 
the primary circuit. 

Note — This latter requirement does not con- 
travene 5.1.3.5(c), the combination of the 
electrically separated circuit and -the extra low 
voltage circuit being regarded as one electrically 
separated circuit. 

e) The socket outlet of functional extra low 
voltage systems shall not admit plugs inten- 
ded for use with other systems in use in the 
same premises. 

Application of Protective Measure — 
Functional extra-low voltage 

Where, for functional reasons, extra-low 
voltage is used but: 

i) One point of the extra-low voltage circuit is 
required to be earthed, or 

ii) Live parts or exposed conductive parts of the 
extra-low voltage circuit are connected to the 
protective conductors of other systems {whether 
those protective conductors are earthed or not); 
or 

iii) The insulation between the extra-low voltage 
circuits and other circuits is not equivalent to 
that provided by a safety source. 

The system shall be treated as a functional 
extra-low voltage system and 5.1.1.3 apply. 



5.1.1.4 Protection by limitation of discharge of 
energy — For equipment complying with the 
appropriate standard, protection against electric 
shock is afforded when the equipment incorporates 
means of limiting the current which can pass 
through the body of a person or livestock to a 
value lower than the shock current. Circuits rely- 
ing on this protective measure shall be separated 
from other circuits in a manner similar to that 
specified in 5.1.1.2(2) (iii) and (iv) for safety extra 
low voltage circuits. 

Application of protective measure — Limitation 
of discharge of energy 

This measure shall be applied only to individual 
items of current-using equipment complying with an 
appropriate Indian Standard, where the equipment 
incorporates means of limiting to a safe value the current 
that can flow from the equipment through the body of a 
person or livestock. The application of this measure may 
be extended to a part of an installation derived from such 
items of equipment, where the relevant Indian Standard 
concerned provides specifically for this, for example, to 
electric fences supplied from electric fence controllers. 

5.1.2 Protection Against Direct Contact 

5.1.2.0 General — One or more of the follow- 
ing basic protective measures for protection against 
direct contact shall be used: 

a) Protection by insulation of live parts, 

b) Protection by barriers or enclosures, 

c) Protection by obstacles, and 

d) Protection by placing out of reach. 

5.1.2.1 Protection by insulation of live parts — 
Live parts shall be completely covered with insu- 
lation which can only be removed by destruction 
and which is capable of durably withstanding, the 
mechanical, electrical, thermal and chemical 
stresses to which it may be subjected in service. 

Note 1 — Where insulation is applied during the 
erection of the installation, the quality of the, insulation 
should be confirmed by tests similar to those which 
ensure the quality of the insulation of similar factory 
built equipment. 

Note 2 — General purpose, paints, varnishes, lac- 
quers and similar products without additional insulation 
do not provide adequate insulation for protection 
against direct contact. 

Application of protective measure — Insulation 
of live parts 

This measure relates to basic insulation, and is inten- 
ded to prevent contact with live parts. It is generally 
applicable for protection against direct contact, in conjunc- 
tion with a measure for protection against indirect 
contact. 



23 



IS : 732 - 1989 



5.1.2*2 Protection by barriers or enclosures 

a) Live parts shall be inside enclosures or 
behind barriers providing at least the 
degree of protection IP 2X except that, 
where an opening larger than that admitted 
for IP 2X is necessary to allow the replace- 
ment of parts or to avoid interference 
with the proper functioning of electrical 
equipment both of the following require- 
ments apply: 

i) Suitable precautions shall be taken to 
prevent persons or livestock from 
unintentionally touching live parts, 
and 

ii) It shall be established as far as practi- 
cable, that persons will be aware that 
live parts can be touched through the 
opening and should not be touched . 

b) Horizontal top surfaces of barriers or 
enclosures which are readily accessible shall 
provide a degree of protection of at least 
IP4X. 

c) Barriers and enclosures shall be firmly 
secured in place and have sufficient stability 
and durability to maintain the required 
degrees of protection and appropriate sepa- 
ration from live parts in the known condi- 
tions of normal service. 

d) Where it is necessary to remove barriers or 
to open enclosures or to remove parts of 
enclosures, one or more of the following 
requirements shall be satisfied: 

i) The removal or opening shall be possi- 
ble only by use of a key or tool, 

ii) The removal or opening shall be possi- 
ble only after disconnection of the 
supply to live parts against which the 
barriers or enclosures afford protection, 
restoration of the supply being possible 
only after replacement or reclosurc of 
the barriers or enclosures, and 

iii) An intermediate barrier shall be provi- 
ded to prevent contact with live parts, 
such barrier affording a degree of pro- 
tection of at least IP 2X and removable 
only by the use of a tool. 

This requirement does not apply to ceiling 
roses or to ceiling switches operated by a cord. 

Application of Protective Measure — Barriers 
or enclosures 

a) This measure is intended to prevent or deter any 
contact with live parts It is generally applicable 

for protection against direct contact in conjunction 
with a measure for protection against indirect 
contact. 

b) The exception in 5.1.2.2(a) allowing for open- 
ings larger than IP 2X in barriers or enclosures 
shall be applied only to items of equipment or 



accessories complying with an Indian Standard 
where compliance with the generality of 5.1. 2.2(a) 
is impracticable by reason of the function of 
those items, for example, to lampholders . Where- 
ver that exception is used, the opening shall be as 
small as is consistent with the requirements for 
proper functioning and for replacement of parts. 

5.1.2.3 Protection by obstacles 

a) Obstacles shall prevent, as appropriate, the 
following: 

i) Unintentional bodily approach to live 
parts, or 

ii) Unintentional contact with live parts 
when operating equipment live in 
normal use. 

b) Obstacles shall be so secured as to prevent 
unintentional removal but may be remov- 
able without using a key or tool. 

Application of Protective Measure — Obstacles 

This measure is intended to prevent unintentional 
contact with live parts, but not intentional contact by 
deliberate circumvention af the obstacles. It shall be used 
only for protection against direct contact in areas accessi- 
ble only to skilled persons, or instructed persons under 
direct supervision. 

5.1.2.4 Protection by plaeing out of reach 

a) Bare or PVC covered overhead lines for 
distribution between buildings and struc- 
tures shall be installed in accordance with 
good practice. 

b) Bare live parts shall not be within arm's 
reach. 

c) Where bare live parts other than overhead 
lines are out of arm's reach but nevertheless 
may be accessible, they shall not be within 
2*5 m of any of the following: 

i) Exposed conductive parts, 
ii) Extraneous conductive parts, and 
iii) Bare live parts of other circuits. 

d) If a normally occupied position is restricted 
in the horizontal plane by an obstacle ( for 
example, handrail mesh screen ) affording 
a degree of protection less than IP 2X, 
arm's reach shall extend from that obstacle. 
In the overhead direction, arm's reach is 
2"5 m from the surface S not taking into 
account any intermediate obstacle provid- 
ing a degree of protection less than IP 2X 
( see Fig. 1 ). 

Note — The values of arm's reach refer to 
bare hands without any assistance, for example, 
from tools or a ladder. 

e) In places where bulky or long conducting 
objects are normally handled, the distances 
required by (b) to (d) shall be increased 
accordingly. 



24, 



IS t 732 - 1989 



Application of Protective Measure — Placing 
out of reach 

This measure is intended only to prevent unintentional 
contact with live parts and shall be applied only for 
protection against direct contact. The application of the 
provisions of 5. 1.2.4(b) to (d) shall be limited to loca- 
tions accessible only to skilled persons, or instructed 
persons under direct supervision. 

5.1.3 Protection Against Indirect Contact 

5.1.3.0 General — One or more of the follow- 
ing basic protective measures for protection against 
indirect contact shall be used: 

a) Earthed equipotential bonding and auto- 
matic disconnection of supply, 

b) Use of Glass II equipment or equivalent 
insulation, 

c) Non-conducting location, 

d) Earth free local equipotential bonding, 
and 

e) Electrical separation. 

5.1.3.1 Protection by earthed equipotential bonding 
and automatic disconnection of supply 

a) General 

i) In each installation main equipotential 
bonding conductors complying with 
IS : 3043-1987* shall connect extrane- 
ous conductive parts including the 
following to the main earthing termi- 
nal for that insulation: 

1 ) Main water pipes, 

2) Main gas pipes, 

3) Other service pipes and ducting, 

4) Risers of central heating and air- 
conditioning systems, and 

5) Exposed metallic parts of the build- 
ing structure. 

Note 1 — This bonding is intended to 
create a zone in which any voltages be- 
tween exposed conductive parts and extra- 
neous conductive parts are minimised. 

Note 2 — Compliance with (a) (i) will 
normally satisfy the relevant requirements 
of the protective multiple earthing. 

Note 3 — Additional equipotential 
bonding may be required [ste 5.1.3.1(a) (v)] , 

ii) The characteristics of the protective 
devices for automatic disconnection, 
the earthing arrangements for the 
installation and the relevant impe- 
dances of the circuits concerned shall be 
coordinated so that during an earth 
fault the voltages between simultane- 
ously accessible exposed and extrane- 
ous conductive parts occurring any- 



where in the installation shall be of 
such magnitude and duration as not 
to cause danger. 

Note 1 — For information on types of 
earthing arrangements, set IS : 3043-1987*. 

Notb 2 — For the conditions of connection 
of exposed conductive parts st$ 5.1.3.1(b) to 
(d) and as appropriate to the earthing 
arrangement concerned. 

iii) The provisions of (ii) above are consi- 
uered to be satisficu ii the automatic 
disconnection provided for occurs with- 
in the duration not permitting the 
touch voltage to exceed the safe value. 

iv) Where protection is afforded by an 
overcurrent protective device, and the 
nominal voltage to earth (U ) is 
240 V rms ac, the earth fault loop im- 
pedance ( Z* )> f° r compliance with 
(iii) above, shall not exceed safe 
values. 

v) Where compliance with the disconnec- 
tion times of (iii) above is afforded by 
a residual current device in an installa- 
tion, the product of the rated residual 
operating current in amperes and the 
earth fault loop impedance in ohms 
shall not exceed the values given in 
IS : 3043-1987* for different types of 
system earthing. 

vi) Within the zone formed by the main 
equipotential bonding, local supple- 
mentary bonding connections shall be 
made to metal parts, to maintain the 
equipotential zone, where those parts: 

1) are extraneous conductive parts, 

2) are simultaneously accessible with 
exposed conductive parts or other 
extraneous conductive parts, and 

3) are not electrically connected to the 
main equipotential bonding by 
permanent and reliable metal-to- 
metal joints of negligible 
impedance. 

Note — Where local equipotential 
bonding is provided in accordance with (vi) 
above, metalwork which may be required 
to be bonded includes baths and exposed 
metal pipes, sinks, taps, tanks and radiators 
and, where practicable, accessible struc- 
tural metalwork. 

b) Installations which are part of a TN system: 

i) All exposed conductive parts of the 
installation shall be connected by pro- 
tective conductors to the main earthing 
terminal of the installation and that 
terminal shall be connected to the 
earthed point of the supply source in 
accordance with IS : 3043-1987*. 



♦Code of practice for earthing (first revision ). 



•Code of practice for earthing. 



25 



IS : 732 - 1989 



ii) The protective devices shall be of one 
or more of the following type: 

1) Overcurrent protective devices, and 

2) Residual current devices. 

Provided that where the neutral 
and the protective functions are combi- 
ned in one conductor (PEN conductor) 
a residual current device shall not be 
used. 

c) Installations which are part of a TT system: 

i) Where protection is afforded by over- 
current protective devices or residual 
current devices, exposed conductive 
parts shall be connected by protective 
conductors individually, in groups or 
collectively to an earth electrode or 
electrodes. 

ii) The protective dt 'ices shall be of one 
or more of the following types: 

1) Residual current devices, and 

2) Overcurrent protective devices. 

d) Installations which are part of an IT 
system: 

i) No live conductor of the installation 
shall be directly connected to earth. 

Note — To reduce overvoltage or to damp 
voltage oscillations, it may be necessary to pro- 
vide earthing through impedances or artificial 
neutral points and the characteristics of these 
should be appropriate to the requirements of 
the installation. 

ii) Exposed conductive parts shall be 
earthed either individually, in groups or 
collectively. Simultaneously accessible 
exposed conductive parts and associated 
extraneous conductive parts shall be 
connected only to an earth electrode 
common to those parts. 

iii) The protective devices shall be residual 
current devices. 

iv) An insulation monitoring device shall 
be provided to indicate the occurrence 
of first fault from a live part to exposed 
conductive parts or to earth. The device 
shall automatically disconnect the 
supply, or initiate an audible and/or 
visual signal. 

Note — First fault should be eliminated as 
quickly as practicable. 

v) After the occurrence of first fault, condi- 
tions for disconnection of supply, as 
specified for TN and TT systems, shall 
apply. 

Application of protective measure — Automa- 
tic disconnection of supply 

a) This measure is generally applicable, and is 
intended to prevent the occurrence of voltage of 



such magnitude and duration between simultane- 
ously accessible conductive parts that danger could 
arise. Il includes all methods involving the earth- 
ing of exposed conductive parts. The limiting 
values of earth fault loop impedance specified 
in 5.1.3.1 (a)(iv) shall be applied where the 
conditions are such that conventionally normal 
body resistance applies. In conditions where 
reduced or very low body resistance is to be 
expected, either the earth fault loop impedance 
values shall be appropriately reduced or another 
protective measure shall be used. 

Note — Conventionally normal body resistance 
relates to a contact involving one hand and both 
feet, the skin being dry or moist with perspiration 
(but not wet ). Reduced body resistance may be 
expected in situations where the hands and/or feet 
are likely to be wet- or where the shock current 
path may not J>e through the extremities, and very 
low body resistance (of the order of one quarter of 
the conventionally normal body resistance ) is to 
be expected in locations where a person is immer- 
sed in a water or working in confined conductive 
locations. 

b) The limiting values of earth fault loop impedance 
specified in 5.1.3.1(a) (iv) are aqplicable only 
where the exposed conductive parts af the equip- 
ment concerned and any extraneous conductive 
parts are situated within the zone created by the 
main equipotential bonding [ see 5.1.3.1(a) (i)]. 

Where a circuit originating in that zone is 
specifically intended to supply equipment to be 
used outside the zone, and that equipment may be 
touched by a person in contact directly with thi 
general mass of earth, the following requirements 
apply: 

i) For solidly grounded system it shall be suffi- 
cient to check whether the provisions of 
5.1.3.1 are complied with in general; 

ii) It shall be verified whether the main over- 
current protection device affords the degree of 
protection envisaged by 5.1.3.1(a) (iv;; 

iii) Where the overcurrent protective device did not 
afford the degree of protection in 5.1.3.1(a) 
(iv) and where the earthing is inadequate, a 
separate residual current device shall be -ins- 
talled, affording a protection in compliance 
•nth 5.1.3.1 (a) (iv); and 

iv) The automatic disconnecting device shall be 
so installed that proper discrimination between 
the circuits being protected is available. 

c) Where the measure is used in a household or 
similar installation forming part of a TT system 
or where the earthing is not effective, every socket 
outlet circuit shall be protected by a residual 
current device having a rated residual operating 
current not exceeding 30 mA. 

d) Automatic disconnection using residual current 
devices shall not be applied to circuits incorporat- 
ing a PEN conductor. The measure is otherwise 
generally applicable, provided that the device is 
selected to have a residual operating current 



26 



IS : 732 - 1989 



ensuring compliance with 5.1.3.1 (a)(ii) and 
(v). The use of such devices is preferred where 
the value of earth fault loop impedance prevents 
the use of overeurrent devices to obtain compli- 
ance with the disconnection times specified 
in 5.1.3.1(a)(iii). 

Note — If a residual current device affording 
protection against indirect contact has a rated 
residual current equal to or less than 30 mA and 
an operating time of 40 ms or less at a residual 
current of 250 mA, it may also be used to reduce 
the risk associated with direct contact in case of 
failure of other protective measures. Such a device 
cannot be used as a sole means of protection 
against direct contact and does not obviate the 
need to apply one of the protective measure speci- 
fied in 5.1.2.0. 

e) Automatic disconnection using fault voltage opera- 
ted protective devices is recognised for use in TT 
and IT systems and is suitable where the impe- 
dance of the earth fault loop prevents compliance 
with 5.1.2.2(b) and (c) by the use of overeurrent 
protective devices. 

5.1.3.2 Protection by use of Class II equipment 
or by equivalent insulation 

a) Protection shall be provided by one or 
more of the following: 

i) Electrical equipment of the following 
types, type tested and marked to the 
relevant standards: 

1) Electrical equipment having rouble 
or reinforced insulation ( Glass II 
equipment ). 

2) Factory built assemblies of electrical 
equipment having total insulation. 

ii) Supplementary insulation applied to 
electrical equipment having basic insu- 
lation only, as a process in the erection 
of an electrical installation, providing a 
degree of safety equivalent to that of 
electrical equipment according to (i)(l) 
above and complying with (b) to (j) 
below. 

iii) Reinforced insulation applied to uninsu- 
lated live parts, as a process in the erec- 
tion of an electrical installation, 
providing a degree of safety equivalent 
to electrical equipment according to 
(i)(l) above and complying with (b) to 
(j), such insulation being recognized 
only where constructional features 
prevent the application of double insu- 
lation. 

b) The installation of equipment described in 
item (a)(i) above ( for example the fixing 
and connection of conductors ) shall be 
effected in such a way as not to impair the 
protection afforded in compliance with the 
equipment specification, Class II equipment 
shall be so installed that basic insulation is 
not the only protection between live parts 



of the installation and exposed metalwork 
of that equipment. 

c) The electrical equipment being ready for 
operation, all conductive parts separated 
from live parts by basic insulation only 
shall be contained in an insulating 
enclosures affording at least the degree of 
protection IP 2X. 

d) The insulating enclosure shall be capable 
of resisting the mechanical, electrical and 
thermal stresses to which it is likely to be 
subjected. 

Note — Coatings of paint, varnish and similar 
products are generally considered not to comply 
with (d) . 

e) If the insulating enclosure has not previ- 
ously been tested, a suitable test shall be 
carried out ( see Section 5 ) . 

f) The insulating enclosure shall not be 
pierced by conductive parts, other than 
circuit conductors, likely to transmit a 
potential. The insulating enclosure shall not 
contain any screws of insulating material, 
the replacement of which by metallic 
screws could impair the insulation provided 
by the enclosure. 

Note — Where the insulating enclosure must be 
pierced by mechanical joints or connections ( for 
example, for operating handles of buit-in equip- 
ment, and for fixing screws ) these should be 
arranged in such a way that protection against 
indirect contact is not impaired. 

g) Where lids or doors in the insulating enclo- 
sure can be opened without the use of a 
tool or key, all conductive parts which are 
accessible if the lid or door is open shall be 
behind an insulating barrier which prevent 
persons from coming into contact with those 
parts; this insulating barrier shall provide a 
degree of protection of at least IP 2X and 
be removable only by use of a tool. 

h) Conductive parts enclosed in the insulating 
enclosure shall not be connected to a pro- 
tective conductor. However, provision may 
be made fur connecting protective conduc- 
tors which necessarily run through the 
enclosure in order to serve other items of 
electrical equipment whose supply circuit 
also runs through the enclosure. Inside that 
enclosure, any such conductors and their 
terminals or joints shall be insulated as 
though they were live parts and their ter- 
minals shall be appropriately marked. 

j) The enclosure provided for this measure 
shall not adversely affect the operation of 
the equipment protected. 



Application of protective measure 
equipment or equivalent insulation 



Class II 



a) This measure is intended to prevent the appearance 
of a dangerous voltage on the exposed metalwork 



27 



IS t 732 - 1989 



of electrical equipment through a fault in the basic 
insulation. It is generally applicable to items of 
equipment, either by the selection of equipment 
complying with an appropriate Indian Standard 
where that standard provides for the use of 
Class II construction or total insulation, or by the 
application of suitable supplementary insulation 
during erection. 

b) Where a circuit supplies items of Class II equip- 
ment, a means of connection to the protective 
conductor of the circuit shall nevertheless be provi- 
ded at every point for the supply of current-using 
equipment likely to be changed by the user, and 
at terminations for accessories similarly likely to 
be changed by the user. This requirement need 
not be observed where (c) below applies . 

Notb — Exposed metal-work of Class II equip- 
ment should preferably be mounted so that it is 
not in electrical contact with any part of the ins- 
tallation connected to a protective conductor. Such 
a contact may impair the Class II protection 
provided by the equipment specification. 

c) Where this measure is to be used as a sole means 
of protection against indirect contact ( that is, 
where a whole installation or circuit is intended 
to consist entirely of Class II equipment or the 
equivalent ), it shall be verified that the installa- 
tion or circuit concerned will be under effective 
supervision in normal use so that no. change is 
made that would impair the effectiveness of the 
Class II or equivalent insulation. The measure 
shall not therefore be so applied to any Circuit 
which includes socket outlets or where a user may 
change items of equipment without authorisation. 
Cables having a non-metallic sheath or a non- 
metallic enclosure shall not be described as being 
of Class II construction. However, the use of such 
cables installed in accordance with relevant 
standard is considered to afford satisfactory pro- 
tection against direct and indirect contact. 

5.1.3.3 Protection by non-conducting location 

a) Exposed conductive parts shall be arranged 
so that under ordinary circumstances a 
person will not come into simultaneous 
contact with: 

i) two exposed conductive parts, or 

ii) an exposed conductive part and any 
extraneous conductive part, 

if these parts are liable to be at different 
potentials through failure of the basic insu- 
lation of live parts. 

b) In a non-conducting location there shall be 
no protective conductors, and any socket 
outlets shall not incorporate an earthing 
contact. 

c) The resistance of insulating floors and walls 
at every point of measurement under the 
conditions specified in 12.3 shall be not less 
than: 

i) 50 kQ where the supply voltage does not 
exceed 500 V, or 



ii) 100 kQ where the supply voltage exceeds 
500 V but does not exceed 1 000 V. 

If at any point the resistance is less 
than the specified value, the floors and 
walls are extraneous conductive parts for 
the purposes of protection against shock. 

Note — Steps may need to be taken so that 
humidity will not effect the resistance of floors 
and walls to such an extent that they do not com- 
ply with 5.1.3.3(c). 

d) The arrangements made shall be perma- 
nent. They shall also afford protection 
where the use of mobile or portable equip- 
ment is envisaged. 

Notb — Attention is drawn to the risk that 
where electrical installations are not under effec- 
tive supervision, further conductive parts may be 
introduced at a later date ( for example , mobile 
or portable Class I equipment or metallic water 
pipes ), which may invalidate compliance 
with (d). 

e) Precautions shall be taken so that a poten- 
tial on extraneous conductive parts in the 
location cannot be transmitted outside that 
location. 

Requirement of 5.1.3.3(a) is fulfilled if 
the location has an insulating floor and 
walls and one or more of the following 
arrangements applies: 

1) Relative spacing of exposed conductive 
parts and of extraneous conductive parts 
as well as spacing of exposed conductive 
parts: This spacing is sufficient if the 
distance between two parts is not less 
than 2 m; this distance may be reduced 
while out of the zone of arm's reach. 

2) Interposition of effective obstacles be- 
tween exposed conductive parts and 
extraneous conductive parts: Such 
obstacles are sufficiently effective if they 
extend the distances to be surmounted 
to the values stated in (1) above. They 
shall not be connected to earth or to 
exposed conductive parts; as far as 
possible they shall be of insulating 
materials. 

3) Insulation or insulating arrangement of 
extraneous conductive parts: The insula- 
tion shall be of adequate electrical and 
mechanical strength. 

Application of Protective Measure — Non- 
conductive location 

This measure is intended to prevent simultaneous^ 
contact with parts which may be at different potentials 
through failure of the basic insulation of live parts. It is 
not recognised in these clauses for general use, but may 
be applied in special situations under effective supervision, 
where specified by a suitably qualified electrical engineer. 



28 



IS i 732 - 1989 



5.1.3.4 Protection by earth free local equipotential 
bonding 

a) Equipotential bonding conductors shall 
connect together all simultaneously accessi- 
ble exposed conductive parts and extraneous 
conductive parts. 

b) The local equipotential bonding conductors 
shall not be in electrical contact with earth 
directly, or through exposed conductive 
parts or through extraneous conductive 
parts. 

Note — Where (b) caunot be observed, 
requirements for protection by automatic discon- 
nection of supply are applicable [ tie 5.1.3,1 (a) 
to(d)]. 

c) Precautions shall be taken so that persons 
entering the equipotential location cannot 
be exposed to dangerous potential diffe- 
rence, in particular, where a conductive 
floor insulated from earth is connected to 
the earth free equipotential bonding 
conductors. 

Application of Protective Measure— Earth free 
local equipotential bonding 

This measure is intended to prevent the appearance 
of a dangerous voltage between simultaneously accessible 
parts in the event of failure of the basic insulation. It 
shall be applied only in special situations which are 
earth free and under effective supervision and where speci- 
fied by a suitably qualified electrical engineer. 

5.1.3.5 Protection by electrical separation — The 
voltage of the electrically separated circuit shall 
not exceed 500 V: 

a) Protection by electrical separation shall be 
afforded by compliance with (b) and (c) 
below and with (d) below for a supply to 
one item of equipment, or (e) below for a 
supply to more than one item of equip- 
ment. 

b) The source of supply to the circuit shall 
comply with the following requirements: 

i) It shall be either: 

1) a safety isolating transformer, the 
secondary winding being isolated 
from earth; or 

2) a source of current providing a 
degree of safety equivalent to that of 
the safety isolating transformer 
referred to above ( for example, a 
motor generator with windings pro- 
viding equivalent isolation ). 

ii) Mobile sources of supply fed from a 
fixed installation shall be selected or 
installed in accordance with 5.1.3.2(a) 
to (j), or 

iii) Equipment used as a fixed source of 
supply, shall be either: 

1) selected and installed in accordance 
with 5.1.3.2(a) to (j), or 



2) such that the output is separated 
from the input and from the enclo- 
sure by an isolation satisfying the 
conditions of 5.1.3.2(a) to (j). If such 
a source supplies several items of 
equipment, exposed metalwork of 
that equipment shall not be connec- 
ted to the metallic enclosure of the 
source. 

c) The separated circuit shall comply with the 
following requirements: 

i) Live parts of the separated circuit shall 
not be connected at any point to another 
circuit or to earth and to avoid the risk 
of a fault to earth, particular attention 
shall be given to the insulation of such 
parts from earth, especially for flexible 
cables and cords. 

ii) Flexible cables and cords shall be visible 
throughout every part of their length 
liable to mechanical damage. 

iii) A separate wiring system shall prefer- 
ably be used for the separated circuit. 
Alternatively, multicore cables without 
metallic sheath, or insulated conductors 
in insulating conduit shall be used, their 
rated voltage being not less than the 
highest voltage likely to occur, and each 
circuit shall be protected against over- 
current. 

iv) Live parts of the separate circuit shall 
be electrically separated from other 
circuits. Arrangements shall ensure 
electrical separation not less than that 
between the input and output of a 
safety isolating transformer. 

Note — In particular, electrical separation 
it necessary between the live parts of electri- 
cal equipment such at relays, contactors, 
auxiliary switches and any part of another 
circuit. 

d) For a circuit supplying a single item of 
equipment, no exposed metalwork of the 
separated circuit shall be connected inten- 
tionally either to the protective conductor 
or to exposed conductive parts of other 
circuits. 

e) If precautions are taken to protect the 
separated circuit from damage and insula- 
tion failure, a source of supply complying 
with 5.1.3.5(b)(i) to (iii) may supply more 
than one item of equipment provided that 
all the following requirements are fulfilled: 

i) The exposed metalwork of the separated 
circuit shall be connected together by 
insulated and non-earthed equipotential 
bonding conductors. Such conductors 
shall not be connected to the protective 
conductors or exposed conductive parts 
of other circuits or to any extraneous 
conductive parts. 



29 



IS t 732 - IStf 



ii) All socket 'outlets shall be provided with 
protective contacts whichshall be con- 
nected to equipotential bonding 
conductors, provided in accordance with 
(i) above. 

Hi) All flexible} cables of equipment other 
than Glass II equipment shall embody 
a protective conductor tor use as an 
equipotential bonding conductor. 

iv) It shall be verified that, if two faults to 
exposed metalwork occur and these are 
fed by conductors of different polarity, 
an associated protective device will meet 
the requirements of 5.1.3.1(a) (ii). 

Application of Protective Measure — Electrical 
separation 

This measure is intended, in the individual circuit, 
to prevent shock currents through contact with exposed 
conductive parts which might be energised by a fault in 
the basic insulation of that circuit. It may be applied to 
the supply of any individual item of equipment by means 
of a transformer the secondary of which is not earthed, or 
a source of equivalent safety. Its use to supply several 
items of equipment from a single separated source is- recog- 
nised in these clauses only for special situations under 
effective supervision, where specified by a suitably qualified 
electrical engineer. 

5.1.4 Special Provisions and Exemptions 

5.1.4.1 For areas to which only skilled 
persons, or instructed persons under direct super- 
vision, have access it is sufficient to provide 
against unintentional contact with live parts by 
use of obstacles in accordance with 5.1.2.3, or by 
placing of live parts out of reach in accordance 
with 5.1.2.4, subject also to 5.1.4.2 to 5.1.4.4. 

5.1.4.2 The dimensions of passage-ways and 
working platforms for open type switchboards and 
other equipment having exposed live parts shall 
comply with relevant standards, as appropriate to 
4he nominal voltage of the live parts. 

5.1.4.3 For areas which are accessible only 
to skilled persons by the use of a safety ward lock 
key or tools, the measures of protection against 
electric shock specified in this section may be 
totally dispensed with, where this is permitted by 
the appropriate authority. 

5.1.4.4 Areas reserved for skilled or instruc- 
ted persons shall be clearly and visibly indicated 
by suitable warning signs. 

5.1.4.5 It is permissible to dispense with 
measures of protection against indirect contact in 
the following instances: 

a) Overhead line insulator wall brackets and 
metal parts connected to them if such parts 
are not situated within arm's reach. 

b) Steel reinforced concrete poles in which the 
steel reinforcement is not accessible. 



c) Exposed conductive parts, which owing to 
their reduced dimensions or their disposition 
cannot be gripped or cannot be contacted 
by a major surface of the human body, 
provided that connection of these parts to 
a protective conductor cannot readily be 
made or cannot be reliably maintained. 

Note — This clause applies to small isolated 
metal parts such as bolts, rivets, nameplates and 
cable clips. For the purposes of (c) above a major 
surface of the human body is considered to be 
50 mm x 50 mm. 

d) Fixing screws for non-metailic accessories 
provided that there is no appreciable risk 
of the screws coming into contact with live 
parts. 

e) Short lengths of metal conduit for mechani- 
cal protection of cables having a non- 
metallic sheath, or other metal enclosures 
mechanically protecting equipment. 

5.1.5 Automatic Disconnection and Reduced System 
Voltages 

5.1.5.1 Where for functional reasons the use 
of extra-low voltage is impracticable and there is 
no requirement for the use of safety extra-low 
voltage, a reduced low voltage system may be used 
as specified in 5.1.5.2 to 5.1.5.7. 

5.1.5.2 The nominal voltage of the reduced 
low voltage circuit shall not exceed 1 10 V rms ac 
between phases ( three phase 65 V to earthed 
neutral, single phase 55 V to earthed midpoint ). 

5.1.5.3 The source of supply to reduced low 
voltage circuits shall be one of" the following: 

— a double wound isolating transformer; 

— a motor generator having windings provid- 
ing isolation equivalent to that provided by 
the windings of an isolating transformer; or 

— a source independent of other supplies, for 
example a diesel generator. 

5.1.5.4 The neutral (star) point of the 
secondary windings of three-phase transformers 
and generators, or the midpoint of the secondary 
windings of single-phase transformers and genera- 
tors, shall be connected to earth. 

5.1.5.5 Protection against direct contact shall 
be provided by insulation or by barriers or enclo- 
sures. 

5.1.5.6 Protection against indirect contact 
by automatic disconnection shall be provided by 
means of an overcurrent protective device in each 
phase conductor or by a residual current device, 
and all exposed conductive parts of the reduced 
low voltage system shall be connected to earth. 
The earth fault loop impedance at every point of 
utilisation, including socket outlets, shall be such 
that the disconnection time does not exceed 
5 seconds. Where a residual current device is used, 



3Q 



IS : 732 • 1989 



the product of the rated residual operating current 
in amperes and the earth fault loop impedance in 
ohms shall not exceed 50. 

5.1.5.7 Plugs, socket outlets and cable coup- 
lers of reduced low voltage systems shall have a 
protective conductor contact and shall not be 
inter-changeable with plugs, socket outlets and 
cable couplers for use at other voltages in the 
same installation. 

5.1.6 Protective Measures for Particular Locations — 
In certain locations the susceptibility of persons, 
and livestock where present, to electric shock may 
be so high as to necessitate special combinations 
of protective measures and supplementary precau- 
tions as specified in the following clauses. 

5.1.6.1 Bathrooms and showers 

a) In a room containing a fixed bath or 
shower, there shall be no socket outlets 
and there shall be no provision for conncc- 
ing portable equipment. Where shower 
cubicles are located in rooms other than 
bathrooms, any socket outlets shall be 
situated at least 2 - 5 m from the shower 
cubicle. These requirements do not apply 
to shaver supply units complying with (d) 
below. 

b) In a room containing a fixed bath or 
shower, supplementary equipotential bond- 
ing shall be provided between simultane- 
ously accessible exposed conductive parts 
and simultaneously accessible extraneous 
conductive parts, and between simultane- 
ously accessible extraneous conductive 
parts. 

c) For circuits supplying equipment in a room 
containing a fixed bath or shower, where 
the equipment is simultaneously accessible 
with exposed conductive parts of other 
equipment or with extraneous conductive 
parts, the characteristics of the protective 
devices and the earthing arrangements shall 
be such that in the event of an earth fault, 
disconnection occurs within 0*4 seconds. 

d) In a room containing a fixed bath or 
shower, electric shavers shall be connected 
only by means of a shaver supply unit 
complying with the relevant Indian Stan- 
dard. The earthing terminal of the shaver 



supply unit shall be connected to the pro- 
tective conductor of the final circuit from 
which the supply is derived. 

e) In a room containing a fixed bath or 
shower cubicle, parts of a lampholder with- 
in a distance of 2"5 m from the bath or 
shower cubicle shall be, constructed of 
or shrouded in insulating material. Bayonet 
type (B22) lampholder shall be fitted with 
a protective shield. As an alternative, 
totally enclosed luminaries may be used. 

f ) Every switch or other means of electrical 
control or adjustment shall be so situated 
as to be normally inaccessible to a person 
using a fixed bath or shower. This require- 
ment does not apply to electric shaver 
supply units installed in accordance with 
(d) above or to insulating cords of cord- 
operated switches, or to controls incorpo- 
rated in instantaneous water heaters. No 
stationary appliance having heating 
elements which can be touched shall be 
installed within reach of a person using the 
bath or shower. For the purpose of this 
standard the sheath of a silica glass sheath- 
ed element is regarded as part of the 
element. 

5.1.6.2 Agricultural installations 

a) In situations accessible to livestock in and 
around agricultural buildings, electrical 
equipment shall, so far ay is practicable, be 
of Class II construction, or constructed of 
or protected by suitable insulation material. 

Where protection against indirect contact 
is provided by automatic disconnection in 
such situations, the limiting values of earth 
fault loop impedance prescribed in 5.1.3.1 
(a)(iv) are not applicable and shall be 
reduced as appropriate to the type of live- 
stock whose presence is envisaged. 

Note — The very low body resistance of horses 
and cattle, for example, makes them susceptible 
to electric shock at voltages lower than 25 V rms 
ac. 

b) Where protection by the use of safety extra- 
low voltage is used in situations accessible 
to livestock in and around agricultural 
buildings, the upper limit of nominal 
voltage specified in 5.1.1.2 does not apply 
and shall be reduced as appropriate. 



SECTION 3B PROTECTION AGAINST THERMAL EFFECTS 



5.2 Requirements for Protection 
Thermal Effects 

5.2.1 General 



5.2.1.1 Protection against thermal effects 
caused by fixed electrical equipment shall be 



Against provided by the appropriate measures specified in 
this section. 

5.2.1.2 All switchgear shall be selected and 
erected in accordance with the requirements 
of Section 4 so as to prevent danger from 
overheating, arcing, or the scattering of hot 
particles during operation. 



31 



IS ] 732 • 1989 



5.2.2 Protection Against Fire 

5.2.2.1 Fixed equipment shall be selected, 
located and erected so that its intended heat dissi- 
pation is not inhibited and it does not present a 
fire hazard to adjacent building materials. 

5.2.2.2 Fixed equipment which in normal 
operation has a surface temperature exceeding 
90°C shall be adequately ventilated and be moun- 
ted so that no material constituting a fire hazard 
is within 300 mm above or 150 mm laterally from 
or below the equipment ( see Fig. 2 ), except that 
these distances may be reduced if a suitable fire- 
resistant shield or enclosure is installed between 
the equipment and any such material. 

This does not apply to lamps, luminaires and 
appliances installed in accordance with the manu- 
facturer's instructions and considered to comply 
with this requirement. 

5.2.2.3 Where a distribution board -is cons- 
tructed without a back or without one or more of 
the other enclosing surfaces it shall be fitted only 
to surfaces of materials or to other equipment in 
such a way as to complete the enclosure. 

5.2.2.4 All fixed luminaires and lamps shall 
be placed or guarded so as to prevent ignition of 
any material which in the conditions of use fore- 
seen are likely to be placed in proximity to the 
luminaires or lamps. Any shade or guard used for 
this purpose shall be suitable to withstand the 
heat from the luminaire or lamp. 

Fixed luminaires mounted in accordance with 
the manufacturer's installation instructions comply 
with this requirement. 



Application of Protective Measure 
consideration. 



Under 




R150 | R150 

V 7 V 

^ i -" 

Fio. 2 Clearances from Equipment 

5.2.3 Protection Against Burns — Where the tem- 
perature of any part of the enclosure of fixed 
equipment is liable to exceed 80°G, the enclosure 
shall be so located or guarded as to prevent 
accidental contact therewith. 



SECTION 3C PROTECTION AGAINST OVERCURRENT 



5.3 Requirements 
Overcurrent 

5.3.1 General 



for Protection Against 5.3.2 Nature of Protective Devices 



5.3.1.1 Live conductors shall be protected by 
one or more devices for automatic interruption of 
the supply in the event of overload ( see 5.3.3 ) 
and short circuits ( see 5.3.4 ) except in cases 
where the overcurrent is limited in accordance 
with 5.3.6. 

Note I — Live conductors protected against 
overload in accordance with 5.3.3 are considered to be 
protected also against faults likely to cause over currents 
of a magnitude similar to overload currents. 

Note 2 — Protection of conductors in accordance 
with this clause does not necessarily protect the equip- 
ment connected to the conductors or flexible cables 
connecting such equipment to fixed installations 
through plugs and socket outlets. 

5.3.1.2 The protection against overload and 
the protection against short circuits shall be co- 
ordinated in accordance with 5.3.5, 



5.3.2.1 General — The protective devices 
shall be of the appropriate types indicated 
in 5.3.2.2 to 5.3.2.4. 



5.3.2.2 Protection against both overload and short- 
circuit currents — Devices providing protection 
against both overload current and short-circuit 
current shall be capable of breaking ( and, for 
circuit breakers, making ) any overcurrent up to 
and including the prospective short-circuit current 
at the point where the device is installed. They 
shall satisfy the requirements of 5.3.3 and 5.3.4.3 
(b) and (c). Such protective devices may be circuit 
breakers incorporating overload release, or fuses, 
or circuit breakers in conjunction withf fuses. '■ 



Note — The use of a projective device having a 
rated breaking capacity below the value of the prospe 
tive short circuit current at its place of installation 
subject to the requirements of 5.3.4.3. W. 



32 



IS t 732 - 1989 



5.3.2.3 Protection against overload current only — 
Devices providing protection against overload ♦ 
currents shall satisfy the requirements of 5.3.3. 
Such devices may have a breaking capacity below 
the value of the prospective short-circuit current 
at the point where the device is installed. 

5.3.2.4 Protection against short-circuit current 
only — Devices providing protection against short- 
circuit currents" shall satisfy the requirements 
of 5.3.4. Such devices shall be capable of breaking 
( and, for circuit breakers, making ) short-circuit 
currents up to and including the prospective short- 
circuit current. Such devices may be circuit 
breakers with short-circuit release, or fuses. 

5.3.3 Protection Against Overload Current 

5.3.3.1 Protective devices shall be provided 
to break any overload current flowing in the 
circuit conductors before such a current could 
cause a temperature rise detrimental to insulation, 
joints, terminationSj or surroundings of the 
conductors. 

5.3.3.2 Coordination between conductors and 
protective devices — The characteristics of a device 
protecting a circuit against overload shall satisfy 
the following conditions: 

a) Its nominal current or current setting ( I a ) 
is not less than the design current ( 7 B ) of 
the circuit. 

b) Its nominal current or current setting ( I n ) 
does not exceed the lowest of the current 
carrying capacities ( J z ) of any of the 
conductors of the circuit. 

c) The current causing effective operation of 
the protective device ( 7 S ) does not exceed 
1*45 times the lowest of the current carry- 
ing capacities ( Iz } of any of the conductors 
of the circuit. 

Where the device is a fuse or a circuit breaker, 
compliance with condition ^b) also results in com- 
pliance with condition (c). 

Where the device is a semi-enclosed fuse, com- 
pliance with condition (c) is afforded if its nominal 
current ( I n ) does not exceed 0725 times the 
current-carrying capacity of the lowest rated 
conductor in the circuit protected. 

Note 1 — The conditions of 5.3.3.2 may be stated 
as formulae as follow: 

Is < In < Iz 

h < 1-45 x Iz 
Note 2 — It is expected that the circuit is so 
designed that small overloads of long duration will not 
frequently occur ('see 3.1.1 ). 

* 5:3.3.3 Protection of conductors in parallel — 
When the same protective device protects conduc- 
tors in parallel, the value of I z is the sum of the 
current-carrying capacities of those conductors. 
This provision is applicable only if those conduc- 
tors are of the same type, cross-sectional area, 



length and disposition, have no branch circuits 
throughout their length and are arranged so as to 
carry substantially equal currents. This does not 
apply to ring circuits. 

Application of protective measure against 
overcurrent 

a) Position of devices for overload protection 

i) A device for protection against overload shall 
be placed at the point where a reduction occurs 
in the value of current-carrying capacity of 
the conductors of the installation. This 
requirement does not apply where the arrange- 
ments mentioned in (ii) below are adopted, and 
no overload protective device need be provided 
where (b) below applies. 

Note — A reduction in the value of current- 
carrying capacity may be caused by a change 
in cross-sectional area, method of installation, 
type of cable or conductor, or in environmen- 
tal conditions. 

ii) The device protecting conductors against over- 
load may be placed along the run of those 
conductors, provided that the part of run 
between the point where the value of current- 
carrying capacity is reduced and the position 
of the protective device has no branch circuits 
or outlets for the connection of current-using 
equipment. 

b) Omission of devices for overload protection — 
Devices for protection against overload need not be 
provided for: 

i) conductors situated on the load side of the 
point where a reduction occurs in the value of 
current-carrying capacity, where the conductors 
are effectively protected against overload by a 
protective device placed on the supply side of 
that point; 

ii) conductors which because of the characteristics 
of the load, are not likely to carry overload 
current; 

iii) circuits supplying equipment where unexpected 
opening of the circuit could cause a greater 
danger than an overload condition, for exam- 
ple, supply circuits of lifting magnets, exciter 
circuits of rotating machines; and 

iv) secondary circuits of current transformers. 

Note — The omission of overload protec- 
tion is recommended for the circuits described 
in (iii) above, but in such cases the provision 
of an overload alarm should be considered. 

c) Overload protoctive device in IT systems 

i) The provisions of (a) (ii) and (b) are appli- 
cable to installations forming part of an IT 
system, only where the conductors concerned 
are protected by a residual current protective 
device, or all the equipment supplied by the 
circuit concerned ( including the conductors ) 
complies with the protective measure described 
in 5.1.3.2. 



33 



IS: 752 -IMS 



5.3.4 Protection Against Short-Circuit Current — 
This clause deals only with the case of short 
circuits anticipated between conductors belonging 
to the same circuit. 

5.3.4.1 General — Protective devices shall be 
provided to break any short-ciruit current in the 
conductors of each circuit before such current 
could cause danger due to thermal and mechani- 
cal effects produced in conductors and connections. 
The nominal current of such a protective device 
may be greater than current-carrying capacity of 
the conductor being protected. 

5^3.4.2 Determination of prospective short-circuit 
current — The prospective short-circuit current at 
every relevant point of the complete installation 
shall be determined. This may be done either by 
calculation or by measurement of the relevant 
impedances. 

Notb — If the prospective short-circuit current at 
the origin of an installation is less than the breaking 
capacity rating of the smallest rated protective device 
to be used in the installation, no further assessment of 
the prospective short-circuit current is necessary. 

5.3.4.3 Characteristics of short-circuit protective 
devices 

a) Each short-circuit protective device shall 
meet the requirements of (b) and (c) 
below; 

b) The breaking capacity rating shall be not 
less than the prospective short-circuit current 
at the point at which the device is 
installed. 

A lower breaking capacity is permitted if 
another protective device having the nece- 
ssary breaking capacity is installed on the 
supply side. In that case the characteristics 
of the devices shall be coordinated so that 
the energy let-through of these two devices 
does not exceed that which can be with- 
stood without damage by the device on the 
load side and the conductors protected by 
these devices. 

Other characteristics may need to be taken 
into account, such as dynamic stresses and 
arcing energy, for the device on the load 
side. 

Notk — Details of the characteristics needing 
coordination should be obtained from the manu- 
facturers of the devices concerned. Coordination 
with regard to their operating times is of 
importance. 

c) Where an overload protective device com- 
plying with 5.3.3 is to be used also for short 
circuit protection, and has a rated breaking 
capacity not less than the value of the pros- 
pective short-circuit current at its point of 
installation, it may generally be assumed 
that the requirements are satisfied as 
regards short-circuit protection of the 
conductor on the load side of that point. 



Note For certain types of circuit breakers, 
especially non-current-limiting types, this assump- 
tion may not be-yalid for the whole range of short- 
circuit currents; in case of doubt, its validity 
should be checked in "accordance with the require- 
ments of (d) below. 

d) Where (c) above docs not apply, it shall be 
verified as follows that all currents caused 
by a short-circuit occurring at any point of 
the circuit shall be. interrupted in a time 
not exceeding that which brings the cable 
conductors to the admissible limiting tem- 
perature. In addition it shail be verified for 
larger installations that the cable is unlikely 
to be damaged mechanically. 

For short-circuits of duration up to 5 seconds 
the time t in which a given short-circuit 
current will raise the conductors from the 
highest permissible temperature in normal 
duty to the limit temperature, can as an 
approximation be calculated from the 
formula: 



t = 






where 

S- 
I - 



A = 



duration in seconds; 

cross-sectional area in mm*; 

effective short-circuit current in 
amperes expressed, for ac, as the 
rms value; 

115 for copper conductors insula- 
ted with PVG; 

134 for copper conductors insulated 

with 60°C rubber, 85°C 
rubber; 

143 for copper conductors with 
90°C thermosetting insulation; 

108 for copper conductors insula- 
ted with impregnated paper; 

1 35 for mineral-insulated cables 
with copper conductors; 

76 for aluminium conductors 
insulated with PVG; 

89 for aluminium conductors 
insulated with 60°C rubber, 
85°G rubber; 

94 for aluminium conductors with 
90°G thermosetting insulation; 

71 for aluminium conductors 
insulated with impregnated 
paper; 

87 for mineral-insulated cables 
with aluminium conductors; 

100 for tin-soldered joints in cop- 
per conductors, corresponding 
to a temperature of 160°G. 



34 



ISY732-1M9 



Note — For very short durations (lea 
than 0*1 second ) where a symmetry of the 
current is of importance and for current 
limiting devices, the value of JfS 1 for the 
cable should be greater than the value of 
let-through energy ( I*t ) of the device as 
quoted by the manufacturer. 

5.3.4.4 Protection of conductors in parallel — A 
single device may protect several conductors in 
parallel against short circuit provided that the 
operating characteristics of the device and the 
method of installation of the parallel conductors 
are suitably coordinated. 

Note — Account should be taken of the conditions 
that would occur in the event of a short circuit which 
does not affect all of the conductors. 

Application of protective measure 5.3.4 

a) Position of devices for short-circuit protection 

i) A devices for protection against skort+circuit 
shall be placed at the point where a reduction 
occurs in the value of current-carrying capa- 
city of the conductors of the installation. This 
requirement does not apply where the arrange- 
ments mentioned in' (ii) or (iii) below are 
adopted, and no short-circuit protective device 
need be provided where (b) below applies. 

Note— A reduction in the value of current- 
carrying capacity may be caused by a change 
in cross-sectionai area, method of installation, 
type of cable or conductor, or in environmental 
conditions. 

ii) The short-circuit protective device may be 
placed at a point on the load side of that 
specified in (i) under the following conditions: 
between the point where the value of current- 
carrying capacity is reduced and ,the position 
of the protective device, the conductors shall: 

1) not exceed 3 m in length, 

2) be erected in such a manner as to reduce 
the risk of short circuit to a minimum, 

and 

3) be erected in such a manner as to reduce 
the risk of fire or danger to persons to a 
minimum. 

Note 1 — The condition specified in 
(2) above may be fulfilled for example, by 
reinforcing the protection of the conductors 
against external influences. 

Note 2 — The provisions of (ii) cannot 
be applied to any part of an installation in 
respect of which the short circuit protec- 
tive device is intended also to afford 
protection against indirect contact. 

iii) The short-circuit protective device may be 
placed at a point other than that specified 
in (i), where a protective device on the supply 
side of that point possesses an operating 
characteristic such that it protects against short 
circuit, in accordance with 5.3.4.3(d), the 
conductors on the load side of that point. 



b) Omission of devices for short-tircuk protection 

i) Devices for protection against short circuit 
need not be provided for. 

1) conductors connecting generators, transfor- 
mers, rectifiers or batteries with their 
control panels, where short-circuit protec- 
tive devices are placed on those panels, 

2) certain measuring circuits, and 

3) circuits where disconnection could cause 
danger in the operation the installation 
concerned. 

Provided that the conductors thus not 
protected against short circuit comply with 
the conditions specified in (a)(ii)(2) and 
(3) above. 

5.3.5 Coordination of Overload and Short-Circuit 
Protection — The characteristics of devices for 
overload protection and those for short-circuit 
protection shall be coordinated so that the energy 
let-through by the short-circuit protective device 
does not exceed that which can be withstood 
without damage by the overload protective device. 

Note — For circuits incorporating motor starters, 
the advice of the manufacturer of the starter should be 
sought. 

5.3.6 Limitation of Overcurrent by Characteristics of 
Supply — Conductors are considered to be protected 
against overload and short-circuit currents where 
they are supplied from a source incapable of 
supplying a current exceeding the current carrying 
capacity of the conductors. 

5.3.7 Protection According to the Nature of Circuits 
and Distribution System 

5.3.7.1 Phase conductors — Means of detection 
of overcurrent shall be provided for each phase 
conductor, and shall cause the disconnection of 
the conductor in which the overcurrent is detected, 
but not necessarily the disconnection of other live 
conductors. Where the disconnection of one phase 
could cause danger, for example in the supply to 
three-phase motors, appropriate precaution! shall 
be taken. 

5.3.7.2 Neutral conductor— TN or TT systems 

a) In TN or TT systems, where the cross- 
sectional area of the neutral contractor is 
less than that of the phase conductors, 
overcurrent detection for the neutral con- 
ductor shall be provided unless both the 
following conditions are satisfied: 

i) the neutral conductor is protected 
against short circuit by the protective 
device for the phase conductor of the 1 
circuit, 

ii) the load is shared as evenly as possible be> 
tween the various phases of the circuit. 



35 



IS i 732 - 1989 



,b) Where either or both of the conditions 
specified in (b) above are not met, over- 
current detection shall be provided for the 
neutral conductor, appropriate- to the cross- 
sectional area of that conductor, and the 
means of detection shall cause the discon- 
nection of the phase conductors but not 
necessarily of the neutral conductor. 

Notb — The cross-sectioal area of the neutral 
conductor should in any event comply with 
Section 4. 

5.3.7.3 Neutral conductor — IT systems 

a) In IT systems, the distribution of the 
neutral conductor shall be avoided where- 
ver practicable. Where distribution of the 
neutral conductor is unavoidable, means of 
detection of overcurrent shall be provided 
for the neutral conductor of every circuit, 
which shall cause disconnection of all the 
live conductors of the circuit concerned 
including the neutral conductor. This 
requirement does not apply where the 



arrangements described in (b) below are 
adopted. 

b) In IT systems where the neutral is distribu- 
ted, means of detection of overcurrent for 
the neutral conductor need not be provided 
if either of the following conditions is 
satisfied: 

i) the neutral conductor concerned is 
effectively protected against short circuit 
,by a protective device placed on the 
supply side, for example at the origin of 
the installation, in accordance with the 
requirements of 5.3.4.3(b); and 
ii) the circuit concerned is protected by a 
residual current device having a rated 
residual operating current not exceeding 
- 15 times the current-carrying capacity 
of the neutral conductor concerned and 
the device is arranged to disconnect all 
the live conductor of the circuit 
concerned including the neutral con- 
ductor. 



SECTION 3D PROTECTION AGAINST OVER VOLT AGE 



5.4 Requirement* for Protection Against 
Overvoltage — Under consideration. 

Notb — This clause it set aside to cover rules con- 
cerning protective measures against overvoltage which 



could be due to several reasons such as: 

a) insulation fault between live parts of circuits 
supplied at different voltages, and 

b) atmospheric phenomena or switching voltages. 



SECTION 3E PROTECTION AGAINST UNDERVOLTAGE 



for Protection Against 



5.5 Requirements 
Undervoltage 

5.5.1 General Requirements 

5.5.1.1 Where a drop in voltage, or a loss 
and subsequent restoration of voltage could imply 
dangerous situations for persons or property, suit- 
able precautions shall be taken. Also, precautions 
shall be taken where a part of the installation or 
current-using equipment may be damaged by a 
drop in voltage. 

An undervoltage protective device is not 
required if damage to the installation or to current- 
using equipment is considered to be an acceptable 
risk, provided that no danger ' is* caused to 
persons. 

5.5.1.2 The operation of undervoltage pro- 
tective devices may be delayed if the operation of 



the appliance protected allows without danger a 
brief interruption or loss of voltage. 

5.5.1.3 If use is made of contractors, delay 
in their opening and reclosing shall not impede 
instantaneous disconnection by control or protec- 
tive devices. 

5.5.1.4 The cfc»racteristics of the undervol- 
tage protective device shaff fce compatible with the 
requirements of the Indian Standards for starting 
and use of equipment. 

5.5.1.5 Where the reclosure of a protective 
device is likely to create a dangerous situation, the 
reclosure shall not be automatic. 



Application of protective measiire 5*r- 
consideratitm. 



Under 



36 



IS 1 732- 1969 



SECTION 3F ISOLATION AND SWITCHING 



5.6 Requirements for Isolation and Switch- 
ing 

5.6.0 General 

5.6.0.1 Means shall ( be provided for non- 
automatic isolation and switching to prevent or 
Temove hazards associated with the electrical 
installation or electrically powered equipment and 
machines. These means shall comply with the 
appropriate requirements of this section. 

5.6.0.2 In TN-C systems the PEN conductor 
shall not incorporate means of isolation or switch- 
ing. In TN-S systems the protective conductor 
shall not incorporate a means of isolation or 
switching and provision need not be made for 
isolation of the neutral conductor except where 
this is specifically required. 

Application of protective measure — Isolation 
and switching 

Every installation shall be provided with means of 

isolation. In addition, means of electrical switching off 

for mechanical maintenance, or means of emergency 

switching, or both shall be provided for any parts of the 

installation to which Section 4 applies. 

Where more than one of these functions are to be per- 
formed by a common device, the arrangement and 
characteristic* of the device shall satisfy all the require- 
ments of these clauses for the various functions concerned. 
Devices for functional switching may serve also for 
isolation, switching off for mechanical maintenance or 
emergency switching where they satisfy the relevant 
requirements. 

Notk — Glauses for selection and erection of 
devices for isolation and switching are contained in 
Section 4. 

5.6.1 Isolation 

5.6.1.1 Every circuit shall be provided with 
means of isolation from each of die live supply 
conductors, except as provided in 5.6.0.2. It is 
permissible to isolate a group of circuits by a 
common means, due consideration being given to 
service conditions. 

5.6.1.2 Adequate provision shall be made so 
that precautions can be taken to prevent any 
equipment from being unintentionally energised. 

5.6.1.3 Where an item of equipment or 
enclosure contains live parts that are not capable 
of being isolated by a single device, a warning 
notice shall be placed in such a position that any 
person gaining access to live parts will be warned 
of the need to use the appropriate isolating 
devices, unless an interlocking arrangement is 
provided so that all the circuits concerned are 
isolated. 

5.6.1.4 Where necessary to prevent danger, 
■adequate means shall be provided for the discharge 
of capacitive electrical energy. 



5.6.1.5' All devices used for isolation shall be 
clearly identifiable for example, by marking, to 
indicate the circuit which they isolate. 

Application for protective measure — Isolation 

a) Means of isolation complying with 5.6.1 shall 
be provided at a point as near as practicable to 
the origin of every installation, without the inter- 
vention of any other equipment on which work 
might need to be done. 

b) Where an isolator is to be used in conjunction 
with a circuit'breaker as a means of isolating 
main switchgear for maintenance^ it shall be 
interlocked with the circuit-breaker; alternatively, 
it shall be so placed and for guarded that it can 
be operated only by skilled persons. 

c) Where isolating devices for particular circuits are 
placed remotely from the equipment to be isolated, 
provision shall be made that the means of isola- 
tion can be secured against inadvertent reclosure 
during the operation for which it is intended. 
Where this provision takes the form of a lock or 
removable handle, the key or handle shall be non- 
interchangeable with any other used for a similar 
purpose within the installation. 

d) Every motor circuit shall be provided with an 
isolating device or devices which shall disconnect 
the motor and all equipment, including any 
automatic circuit-breaker, used therewith* 

e) For electric discharge lighting installations using 
an open-circuit voltage exceeding low voltage, 
one or more of the following means shall be pro- 
vided for the isolation of every self-contained 
luminaire, or alternatively of every circuit supply- 
ing luminaires at a voltage exceeding low 
voltage: 

i) an interlock on a self contained luminaire, so 
arranged that before access can be had to 
live parts the supply is automatically discon- 
nected, such means being additional to the 
switch normally used for controlling the 
circuit, 

ii) effective local means for the isolation of the 
circuit from the supply, such means being 
additional to the switch normally used 
controlling the circuit, and 

iii) a switch having a lock or removable handle, 
or a distribution board which can be locked, 
in either case complying with (c) above. 

5.6.2 Switching Off for Mechanical Maintenance 

5.6.2.1 Means of switching off for mechani- 
cal maintenance shall be provided where mecha- 
nical maintenance may involve a risk of physical 
injury. 



37 



liS : 732 - 1989 



5.6.2.2 Devices for switching off for mecha- 
nical maintenance shall be suitably placed, readily 
identifiable (for example by marking if necessary) 
and convenient for their intended use. 

5.6.2.3 Suitable means shall be provided so 
that precautions can be taken to prevent any 
equipment from being unintentionally or inadver- 
tently reactivated. 

Application of protective measure prescribed 
in 5.6.2 

A means of switching off for mechanical maintenance 
shall be provided for every circuit supplying an electric 
motor, or equipment having electrically heated surfaces 
which can be touched, or electromagnetic equipment for 
operations from which mechanical accidents could arise. 

Where a switch mounted on an appliance or luminaire 
is intended to serve as a means of switching off for 
mechanical maintenance, the connections shall be so 
arranged that the appliance or luminaire can be disman- 
tled to the extent necessary for mechanical maintenance 
without thereby exposing any parts which remain live 
when the switch is open. Any conductors or cables which 
then remain live shall be as short as possible, and separa- 
ted from any other live conductors or cables by screens or 
earthed metal or suitable barriers of insulating material. 

5.6.3 Emergency Switching 

5.6.3.1 For every part of an installation 
which it may be necessary to disconnect rapidly 
from the supply in order to prevent or remove a 
hazard, a means of emergency switching shall be 
provided. 

5.6.3.2 Means for emergency switching shall 
act as directly as possible on the appropriate 
supply conductors, and shall be such that a single 
initiative action will cut off the appropriate 
supply. 

5*6.3.3 The arrangement of emergency 
switching shall be such that its operation does not 
introduce a further hazard or interfere with the 
complete operation necessary to remove the 
hazard. 

5.6.3.4 Devices for emergency switching 
shall be readily accessible and suitably marked. 

5.6.3.5 Means of emergency stopping shall 
be provided where movements by electrical means 
may give rise to danger. 

Application of protective measure — Emergency 
switching 

a) For every emergency switching device, account 
shall be taken of the intended use of the premises 
so that access to the device is not likely to be 
impeded in the conditions of emergency foreseen. 

b) Where greater danger would arise from incorrect 
operation of emergency Switching ( as for example 
by inadvertent disconnection of safety services ), 
the means of emergency switching may be 
arranged so as to be suitable for operation by 
skilled persons or instructed persons only. 



c) Means of emergency switching shall be provided 
in every place where a machine driven by tlectric 
means may give rise to danger, and shall 
be readily accessible and easily operated by the 
person in charge of the machine. Where more 
than one means of manually stopping the machine 
is provided and danger might be caused by unex- 
pected restarting, means shall be provided to 
prevent such restarting. 

d) A fireman's emergency switch shall be provided 
for. 

— exterior discharge lighting installations opera- 
ing at a voltage exceeding low voltage, and 

— interior discharge lighting installations operat- 
ing unattended at a voltage exceeding low 
voltage. 

For the purpose of this requirement, an insta- 
llation in a closed market or in an arcade is 
considered to be an exterior installation. A 
temporary installation in a permanent building 
used for exhibitions is considered not to be an 
exterior installation. This requirement does not 
apply to a portabte discharge lighting luminaire 
or sign of rating not exceeding 100 W and fed 
from a readily accessible socket outlet. 

e) Every fireman's emergency switch provided for 
compliance with (d) shall compty with all the 
relevant requirements of the following items: 

i) For exterior installations, the switch shall be 
outside the building and adjacent to the dis- 
charge lamp(s), or alternatively a notice 
indicating the position of the switch shall be 
placed adjacent to the discharge lamp[s) and 
a nameplate shall be fixed near the switch so 
as to render it clearly distinguishable. 

ii) For interior installations, the switch shall be 
in the main entrance to the building or in 
another position to be agreed with the local 
fire authority. 

iii) The switch shall be placed in a conspicuous 
position, reasonably accessible to firemen and 
except where otherwise agreed with the local 
fire authority, at not more than 2 "75 m from 
the ground. 

iv) Where more than one switch is installed on 
any one buiding, each switch shall be clearly 
marked to indicate the installation or part of 
the installation which it controls, and the 
local fire authority shall be notified accord- 
ingly. 

Note — Wherever practicable, all exterior 
installations on any one building should be 
controlled by a single fireman's switch. Simi- 
larly all internal installations in any one 
building should be controlled by a single fire- 
man's switch independent of the switch for 
any external installation. 



38 



IS : 732 - 1989 



5.6.4 Other Requirements for Switching for Safety 

5.6.4.1 In situations where the requirements 
of 5.6.3 for emergency switching are not applica- 
ble, the requirements of 5.6.4.2 to 5.6.4.7 shall be 
satisfied, either: 

— by means of isolation and/or the means of 
switching off for mechanical maintenance 
provided for compliance with 5.6.1 and 
5.6.2, or 

— by the arrangements for switching of equip- 
ment for its normal service ( functional 
switching ), or 

— by the provision of suitable additional 
means of switching. 

5.6.4.2 A main switch or circuit-breaker 
shall be provided for every installation which 
shall interrupt all live conductors of the installa- 
tion, provided that for a 4-wire three-phase ac 
supply the linked switch or linked circuit-breaker 
may be arranged to disconnect the phase conduc- 
tors only and a link may be inserted in the neutral 
conductor; such a link shall be arranged such that 
it is in contact before the linked switch can be 
closed, or shall be securely fixed by bolts or 
screws. 

5.6.4.3 Every circuit and final circuit shall 
be provided with means of interrupting the supply 
on load and in any fault conditions foreseen. A 
group of circuits may be switched by a common 
device. Additionally, such means shall be provided 
for every circuit or other part of the installation 
which it may be necessary for safety reasons to 
switch independently of other circuits or other 
parts oNhc installation. This regulation does not 
apply to short connections between the origin of 



the installation and the consumer's main switch- 
gear. 

5.6.4.4 Every appliance or luminaire con- 
nected to the supply other than by means of a 
plug and socket outlet complying with Section 4, 
shall be provided with a means of interrupting the 
supply on load. The means of interruption shall 
be separate from the appliance and in a readily 
accessible position, subject to the provisions 
of 5.6.4.5 and 5.6.4.6 where applicable. For an 
appliance fitted with heating elements which can 
be touched, the means of interruption shall be a 
linked switch arranged to break all the circuit 
conductors including the neutral. For the purpose 
of this regulation the sheath of silica-glass sheathed 
element is regarded as part of the element. Where 
the means of interruption is also intended to serve 
as a means of switching off for mechanical main- 
tenance, it shall comply with the jrequirements of 
Section 4. 

5.6.4.5 The means of interrupting the supply 
required by 5.6.4.4 may be a device mounted on 
the appliance or luminaire, as in 5.6.2 where the 
device is intended to serve as a means of switching 
off for mechanical maintenance. 

5.6.4.6 The means of interrupting the supply 
on load to comprehensive heating or lighting 
installations comprising more than one appliance 
or luminaire, may be installed in separate room. 

5.6.4.7 Every fixed or stationary household 
cooking appliance shall be controlled by a switch 
separate from the appliance and placed within 2 m 
Of the appliance. Where two stationary cooking 
appliances are installed in one room of household 
premises, one switch may be used to control both 
appliances provided that neither .appliance is more" 
than 2 m from the switch. 



SECTION 4 DESIGN OF INSTALLATION, SELECTION AND 
ERECTION OF EQUIPMENT 



«. FUNDAMENTAL REQUIREMENTS 
6.1 Fundamental Requirement* for Design 

6.1.0 For the design of the electrical installa- 
tion, the following factors shall be taken into 
account to ensure: 

a) the protection of persons, livestock and pro- 
perty in accordance with Section 3, and 

b) the proper functioning of the electrical 
installationJbr the use intended. 

The information required as the basis for 
design of installation and selection of equipment 
are stated below. 

6.1.1 Characteristics of the available supply or 
supplies: 

a) Nature of current: ac or dc or both 



b) Nature and number of conductors: 

i) For ac : phase conductors 
neutral conductors 
protective conductors 

ii) For dc : conductors equivalent to those 
listed for ac 

c) Values and tolerances: 

i) Voltage and voltage tolerances 
ii) Frequncy and frequency tolerances 
iii) Maximum current allowable 
iv) Prospective short-circuit current 

d) Power factor 

e) Protective measures inherent in the supply, 
for example, earthed ( grounded ) neutral 
or mid-wire 



39 



IS i 732 - 1989 



f) Particular requirements of the supply 
undertaking. 

g) Particular requirements of the load. 

6.1.2 Nature of Demand — The number and 
type of the circuits required for lighting, heating, 
power, control, signalling, telecommunication, etc, 
are to be determined by. 

a) location of points of power demand, 

b) loads to be expected on the various circuits, 

c) daily and yearly variation of demand, 

d) any special conditions, and 

e) requirements for control, signalling, tele- 
communication, etc. 

6.1.3 Emergency Supply or Supplies 

a) Source of supply ( nature, characteristics ), 
and 

b) Circuits to be supplied by the emergency 
source. 

6.1.4 Environmental Conditions — See 4. 

6.1.5 Cross Section of Conductors — The cross 
section of conductors shall be determined accord- 
ing to: 

a) their admissible maximum temperature, 

b) the admissible voltage drop, 

c) the electromechanical stresses likely to occur 
due to short circuits, 

d) other mechanical stresses to which the 
conductors may be exposed, and 

e) the maximum impedance with respect to 
the functioning of the short-circuit protec- 
tion. 

Note — The above listed items concern 
primarily the safety of electrical installations. 
Cross-sectional areas greater than those required 
for safety may be desirable for economic opera- 
tion. 

6.1.6 Type of Wiring and Methods of Installation — 
The choice of the type of wiring and the methods 
of installation depend on: 

a) the nature of the locations, 

b) the nature of the walls or other parts of the 
building supporting the wiring, 

c) accessibility of wiring to persons and live- 
stock, 

d) voltage, 

e) the electromechanical stresses likely to occur 
due to short circuits, and 

f ) other stresses to which the wiring may be 
exposed during the erection of the electrical 
installation or in service. 

6.1.7 Protective Equipment — The characteristics 
of protective equipment shall be determined with 



respect to their function which may be for 
example, protection against the effects of: 

a) overcurrent ( overload and short circuit ), 

b) earth-fault current, 

c) overvoltage, and 

d) undervoltage and no-voltage. 

The protective devices shall operate at values- 
of current voltage and time which are suitably 
related to the characteristics of the circuits and to 
the possibilities of danger. 

6.1.7.1 Position of protective devices and switches 

a) No fuse, or circuit-breaker other than a 
linked circuit-breaker, shall be inserted in 
an earthed neutral conductor, and any 
linked circuit-breaker inserted in an earthed 
neutral conductor shall be arranged to 
break also all the related phase conductors. 

b) Every single pole switch shall be inserted in 
the phase conductor only, and any switch 
connected in an earthed neutral conductor 
shall be a linked switch and shall be 
arranged to break also all the related phase 
conductors. 

c) Effective means, suitably placed for ready 
operation, shall be provided so that all 
voltage may be cut off from every installa- 
tion, from every circuit thereof and from 
all equipment, as may be necessary to 
prevent or remove danger. 

Note — Where the supply undertaking provide 
switchgear or fusegear at the origin of the instal- 
lation it may not be necessary to duplicate the 
means of isolation for that part of the installation 
between its origin and the main distribution point 
of the installation where the next step for isolation 
is provided ( see 5.0.4.1 ). In domestic installations, 
the isolating and protection functions are combined 
in the same device. 

d) For every electric motor an efficient means 
of disconnection shall be provided which 
shall be readily accessible, easily operated 
and so placed as to prevent danger. 

6.1.8 Emergency Control — Where, in case of 
danger, there is necessity for immediate interrup- 
tion of supply, an interrupting device shall be 
installed in such a way that it can be easily recog- 
nized and effectively and rapidly operated. 

6.1.9 Disconnecting Devices — Disconnecting 
devices shall be provided so as to permit discon- 
nection of the electrical installation, circuits or 
individual items of apparatus as required for 
maintenance, testing, fault detection or repair. 

6.1.10 Prevention of Mutual Influence between Elec- 
trical and Non-electrical Installations — The electrical 
installation shall be arranged in such a way that 
no mutual detrimental influence will occur between 
the electrical installation and non-electrical instal- 
lations of the building. 



40 



18 i 732 - 1989 



6.1*11 Accessibility of Electrical Equipment — The 
electrical equipment shall be arranged so as to 
afford: 

a) sufficient space for the initial installation 
and later replacement of individual items of 
electrical equipment; and 

b) accessibility for operation, testing, inspec- 
tion, maintenance and repair. 

6.2 Fundamental Requirements for Selection 
of Electrical Equipment 

6.2.0 Every item of electrical equipment used 
in electrical installations shall comply with rele- 
vant Indian Standard specifications. 

6.2.1 Characteristics — Every item of electrical 
equipment selected shall have suitable characteris- 
tics appropriate to the values and conditions on 
which the design of the electrical installation 
( see 6.1 ) is based and shall, in particular, fulfil 
the following requirements. 

6.2.1.1 Voltage — Electrical equipment shall 
be suitable with respect to the maximum steady 
voltage ( rms value for ac ) likely to be applied, 
as well as overvoltages likely to occur. 

Note — For certain equipment, it may be nece- 
ssary to take account of the lowest voltage likely to 
occur. 

6.2.1.2 Current — All electrical equipment 
shall be selected with respect to the maximum 
steady current ( rms value for ac ) which it has to 
carry in normal service, and with respect to the 
current likely to be carried in abnormal conditions 
and the period ( for example, operating time of 
protective devices if any ) during which it may be 
expected to flow. 

6.2.1.3 Frequency — If frequency has an in- 
fluence on the characteristics of electrical equip- 
ment, the rated frequency of the equipment shall 
correspond to the frequency likely to occur in the 
circuit. 

6.2.1.4 Power — All electrical equipment, to 
be selected on the basis of its power characteristics, 
shall be suitable for the duty demanded of the 
equipment, taking into account the load factor 
and the normal service conditions. 

6.2.2 Conditions of Installation — All electrical 
equipment shall be selected so as to withstand 
safely the stresses and the environmental condi- 
tions ( see 4 ) characteristic of its location and to 
which it may be exposed. If, however, an item of 
equipment does not have by design the properties 
corresponding to its location, it may be used on 
condition that adequate additional protection is 
provided as part of the completed electrical instal- 
lation. 

6.2.3 Prevention of Harmful Effects — All electrical 
equipment shall be selected so that it will not 



cause harmful effects on other equipment or 
impair the supply during normal service including 
switching operations. In this context, the factors 
which may have an influence include, for exam- 
ple: 

a) power factor, 

b) inrush current, 

c) asymmetrical load, and 

d) harmonics. 

6.3 Fundamental Requirements for Erection 
and Initial Testing of Electrical Installations 



6.3.1 Erection 

6.3.1.1 For the erection of the electrical 
installation good workmanship by suitably quali- 
fied personnel and the use of proper materials shall 
be provided for. 

6.3.1.2 The characteristics of the electrical 
equipment, as determined in accordance with 6.2, 
shall not be impaired in the process of erection. 

6.3.1.3 Protective conductors and neutral 
conductors shall be identifiable at least at their 
terminations by colouring or other means. These 
conductors in flexible cords or flexible cables shall 
be identifiable by colouring or other means 
throughout their length. 

6.3.1.4 Connections between conductors and 
between conductors and other electrical equipment 
shall be made in such a way that safe and reliable 
contact is ensured. 

6.3.1.5 All electrical equipment shall be 
installed in such a manner that the designed cool- 
ing conditions are not impaired. 

6.3.1.6 All electrical equipment likely to 
cause high temperatures or electric arcs shall be 
placed or guarded so as to eliminate the risk of 
ignition of flammable materials. Where the tem- 
perature of any exposed parts of electrical equip- 
ment is likely to cause injury to persons, those 
parts shall be so located or guarded as to prevent 
accidental contact therewith. 

7. COMMON RULES 

7.0 General — Every item of equipment shall be 
selected and erected so as to comply with the 
requirements stated in this code. 

7.1 Compliance with Standards — All equip- 
ment fittings and accessories, materials, etc, selec- 
ted for the wiring installation shall conform to the 
relevant Indian Standard. 

7.2 Operational Conditions and External 
Influences 

7.2.1 Voltage — All equipment shall be suitable 
for the nominal voltage ( rms value for ac ) of the 
installation. 



41 



IS t 732 - 1989 



In an IT system, if the neutral conductor is 
distributed, equipment connected between phase 
and neutral shall be insulated for the nominal 
voltage between phases. 

•Note 1 — Where inductive or capacitive equipment 
is concerned, the design of switches and circuit breakers 
should be adequate for such service. 

Notk 2 — For certain equipment, it may be nece- 
ssary to take account of the highest and/or lowest 
voltage likely to occur in normal service. 



All equipment shall be suitable 



7.2.2 Current 
for: 

a) the design current ( rms value for ac ), and 

b) the current likely to flow in abnormal 
conditions for such periods of time as are 
determined by the characteristics of the 
protective devices concerned. 

Note — Where inductive or capacitive equip- 
ment is concerned, the design of switches aod 
circuit-breakers should be adequate for such 
service. 

7.2.3 Frequency — If frequency has an influence 
on the characteristics of the equipment, the rated 
frequency of the equipment shall correspond to 
the frequency of the current in the circuit 
concerned. 

7.2.4 Power — Equipment to be selected on the 
basis of its power characteristics shall be suitable 
for the duty demanded of the equipment, taking 
into account the load factor and the normal opera- 
tional conditions. 

7.2.5 Compatibility — All equipment shall be 
selected and erected so that it will not cause 
harmful effects on other equipment or impair the 
supply during normal service including switching 
operations. 

7.2.6 External Influences— All equipment shall be 
of a design appropriate to the situation in which 
it is to be used and its mode of installation shall 
take into account the conditions likely to be 
encountered. 

7.3 Accessibility 

7.3.1 All equipment shall be arranged so as to 
facilitate its operation, inspection and maintenance 
and access to its connections. Such facilities shall 
not be significantly impaired by mounting equip- 
ment in enclosures or compartments. 

7.4 Identification and Notices 

7.4.1 General — Labels or other suitable means 
of identification shall be provided to indicate the 
purpose of switchgear and controlgear, unless 
there is no possibility of confusion. 

Where the operation of switchgear and control- 
gear cannot be observed by the operator and 
where this might cause a danger, a suitable 



indicator, complying with IS : 7118-1973* where 
applicable, shall be fixed in a position visible to 
the operator. 

7.4.2 Protective Devices — Protective devices shall 
be arranged and identified so that the circuits 
protected may be easily recognized; for this 
purpose it may be convenient to group them in 
distribution boards. 

7.4.3 Diagrams — Diagrams, charts or tables 
shall be provided indicating in particular: 

a) the type and composition of circuits (points 
of utilization served, number and size of 
conductors, type of wiring ); and 

b) the information necessary for the identifica- 
tion of the devices performing the functions 
of protection, isolation and switching, and 
their locations. 

For simple installations the foregoing informa- 
tion may be given in a schedule. 

7.4.4 Warning Notices — Voltage — Every item of 
equipment or enclosure within which a voltage 
exceeding 250»golts exists, and where the presence 
of such a voltage would not normally be expected, 
shall be so arranged that before access is gained 
to live parts, a warning of the maximum voltage 
present is clearly visible ( see IS : 2551-1982f ). 

Where terminals or other fixed live parts 
between which a voltage exceeding 250 volts exists 
are housed in separate enclosures or items of 
equipment which, although separated, can be 
reached simultaneously by a person, a notice shall 
be placed in such a position that anyone gaining 
access to live parts is warned of the maximum 
voltage which exists between those parts. 

Means of access to all live parts of switchgear 
and other fixed live parts where different nominal 
voltages exist shall be marked to indicate the 
voltage present. 

7.5 Mutual Detrimental Influence 

7.5.1 All electrical equipment shall be selected 
and erected so as to avoid any harmful influence 
between the electrical installation and any non- 
electrical installations envisaged. 

7.5.2 Where equipment carrying currents of 
different types or at different voltages is grouped 
in a common assembly, all equipment using any 
one type of current or any, one voltage shall, 
wherever necessary, be effecflveiy segregated from 
equipment of any other type, to avoid mutual 
detrimental influence. 



'Recommendations for direction of movement for con- 
trol devices operating electrical apparatus. 
tDanger notice plates [first revision )'. 



42 



IS t 732 - 1989 



8. GABLES, CONDUCTORS AND WIRING 
MATERIALS 

8.1 Selection of Types of Wiring Systems 

8.1.1 Non-fitxible Cables and Conductors for Low 
Voltages 

8.1.1.1 Every non-flexible cable operating at 
low voltage selected from one of the recognized 
types conforming to relevant Indian Standard. 

8.1.1.2 Paper-insulated cables shall be of a 
type which wilt comply with the requirements 
of IS : 692-1973* for non-draining cables, where 
drainage of the impregnating compound would 
otherwise be liable to occur. 

8.1.1.3 Busbars and busbar connections shall 
comply with IS : 8623 ( Part 1 )-1977f. 

8.1.1.4 Every conductor, other than a cable, 
for use recognized as an overhead line operating 
at low voltage shall be selected, from one of the 
recognized types and shall comply with the appro- 
priate Indian Standard. 

8.1.2 Flexible Cables and Flexible Cords for Low 
Voltage 

8.1.2.1 Every flexible cable recognized and 
flexible cord for use at low voltage shall be selec- 
ted from one of the recognized types and shall 
comply with the appropriate Indian Standard. 

8.1.3 Cables for Extra-Low Voltage — Gables for 
use at extra-low voltage shall have adequate 
insulation, and further protection if necessary, so 
as to prevent danger. 

8.1.4 Cables for AC Circuits — Electromagnetic 
Effects — Conductors of ac circuits installed in 
ferrous enclosures shall be arranged so that the 
conductors of all phases and the neutral conductor 
( if any ) are contained in the same enclosure. 
Where such conductors enter ferrous enclosures 
they shall be arranged so that the conductors are 
not separated by a ferrous material or provisions 
shall be made to prevent circulating eddy 
currents. 

8.1.5 Conduits and Conduit Fittings 

8.1.5.1 Conduits and conduit fittings shall 
comply with the appropriate Indian Standard. 

8.1.5.2 In conduit systems, the conduits for 
each circuit shall be completely erected before any 
cable is drawn in. This requirement does not 
apply to prefabricated conduit systems which are 
not wired in situ. 



'Specification for paper insulated lead-sheathed cables 
for electricity supply ( jtcoitd revision ). 

fSpecification for factory-built assemblies of switchgear 
and controlgear for voltages up to and including 1 000 V ac 
and 1 200 V dc: Part 1 General requirements. 



8.1.5.3 In the prefabrication of conduit 
systems which are not to be wired in situ, adequate 
allowance shall be made for variations in building 
dimensions so that the conduits or cables are not 
subjected to tension or other mechanical strain 
during installation. Adequate precautions shall also 
be taken to prevent damage to such systems during 
installation and any subsequent building opera- 
tions, especially against deformation of the 
conduits and damage to any exposed cable ends. 

8.1.6 Trunking, Dueling and Fittings — Trunking, 
ducting and fittings shall comply, where applicable 
with the relevant Indian Standard. 

8.1.7 Methods af Installation of Cables and Conduc- 
tors 

8.1.7.1 Methods of installation of cables and 
conductors in common use for which this code 
specifically provide are described in Appendix A. 
The use of other methods is not precluded, provi- 
ded that the applicable requirements of this section 
are complied with. 

8.1.7.2 Ducts cast in situ in concrete, by 
means of a suitable form laid before the concrete 
is poured, into which cables are to be drawn 
( whether or not formers are retained in position 
after the concrete has set ) shall be so formed that 
the radial thickness of concrete or screed surround- 
ing the cross section of the completed duct is not 
less than 15 mm at every point. 

8.2 Operation Conditions 

8.2.1 Current-Carrying Capacity 

8.2.1.1 The cross-sectional area of every 
cable conductor shall be such that its current- 
carrying capacity is not less than the maximum 
sustained current which will normally flow through 
it. For the purposes of this clause the limiting 
temperature to which the current-carrying capacity 
relates shall not exceed that appropriate to the 
type of cable insulation concerned. This does not 
apply to conductors on switchboards complying 
with 8.2.2. 

8.2.1.2 Busbars, busbar connections and 
bare conductors forming part of the equipment of 
switchboards shall comply as regards current- 
carrying capacity and limits of temperature with 
the requirements of IS : 8623 ( Part 1 )-1977*. 

8.2.1.3 Cables connected in parallel shall be 
of the same type, cross-sectional area, length and 
disposition and be arranged so as to carry substan- 
tially equal currents. 

8.2.1.4 In determining the current-carrying 
capacity of bare conductors, account shall be 
taken of the arrangement made for their expansion 
and contraction, their joints, and the physical 
limitations of the metal of which they are made. 



•Specification for factory-built assemblies of switchgear 
and controlgear for voltages up to and including 1 0G0 V ac 
and 1 200 V dc: Part 1 General requirements. 



43 



IS i 732 - 1989 



Notb — It is recommended that the maximum 
operating temperature of bare conductors should not 
exceed 90°G. 

8.2.1.5 Where cables are to be connected to 
bare conductors or busbars it shall be verified that 
their type of insulation and/ or sheath is suitable 
for the maximum operating temperature of the 
bare conductors or busbars. Alternatively the insu- 
lation and/or sheath of the cables shall be removed 
for a distance of 150 mm from the connection and 
replace if necessary by suitable heat-resisting 
insulation. 

8.2.1.6 Where a cable is to be run for a 
significant length in a space to which thermal 
insulation is likely to be applied, the cable shall, 
wherever practicable, be fixed in a position such 
that it will not be covered by the thermal insula- 
tion. Where fixing in such a position is impracti- 
cable, the current-carrying capacity of the cable 
shall be appropriately reduced. 

Notb — For a cable installed in thermally insulat- 
ing wall or above a thermally insulated ceiling, the 
cable being in contact with a thermally conductive 
surface on one side, the rating factor to be applied may, 
in the absence of more precise information, be taken as 
0*75 times the current-carrying capacity for that cable 
clipped direct to a surface and open. For a cable likely 
to be totally surrounded by thermally insulating mate- 
rial, the applicable rating factor may be as low as 0*5. 

8.2.1.7 Metallic sheaths and/or non-magne- 
tic armour of all single-core cables in the same 
circuit shall normally be bonded together at both 
ends of their run ( solid bonding ). Alternatively, 
where specified, such cables having conductors of 
cross-sectional area exceeding 50 mm 2 may be 
bonded together at one point in their run ( single 
point bonding ) with suitable insulation at the 
open-circuit end, in which case the length of the 
cables from the bonding point shall be limited so 
that voltages from sheaths and/or armour to Earth 
do not: 

— exceed 25 volts and do not cause corrosion 
when the cables are carrying their full load 
current, and 

— do not cause danger or damage to property 
when the cables are carrying short-circuit 
current. 

8.2.2 Voltage Drop — The size of every bare 
conductor or cable conductor shall be such that 
the voltage drop within the installation does not 
exceed a value appropriate to the safe functioning 
of the associated equipment in normal service. 
Where an allowance is made for diversity in 
accordance with 3.1.2, this may be taken into 
account in calculating voltage drop. 

Note — In some instances a conductor larger than 
that permissible under 8.2.2 may be necessary for satis- 
factory starting of motors. Account should be taken of 
the effects of motor starting current on other equip- 
ment. 



8.2.3 Minimum Cross-Sectional Area of Neutral' 
Conductors — For polyphase circuits in which 
imbalance may occur in normal service, through 
significant inequality of loading or of power 
factors in the various phases, or through the 
presence of significant harmonic currents in the 
various phases, the neutral conductor shall have a 
cross-sectional area adequate to afford compliance 
with 8.2.1.1 for the maximum current likely to 
flow in it. 

For polyphase circuits in which serious 
imbalance is unlikely to be sustained in normal 
service, other than discharge lighting circuits, the 
use of multicore cables incorporating a reduced 
neutral conductor in accordance with the appro- 
priate Indian Standard is recognised. Where 
single-core cables are used in such circuits, the 
neutral conductor may have a reduced cross- 
sectional area appropriate to the expected value of 
the neutral current. 

In any circuit where load is predominantly due 
to discharge lighting, the neutral conductor shall 
have a cross-sectional area not less than that of 
the phase conductor (s). 

8.2.4 Electromechanical Stresses — All conductors 
and cables shall have adequate strength and be so 
installed as to withstand the etectromechanical 
forces that may be caused by any current they 
may have to carry in service, including short- 
circuit current. 

8.3 Environmental Conditions 
8.3.1 Ambient Temperature 

8.3.1.1 The type and current-carrying capa- 
city of every conductor, cable and flexible cord, 
termination and joint shall be selected so as to be 
suitable for the highest operating temperature 
likely to occur in normal service, account being 
taken of any transfer of heat from any accessory, 
appliance or luminaire to which the conductor, 
cable or flexible cord is connected. 

8.3.1.2 Parts of a cable or flexible cord with- 
in an accessory, appliance or luminaire shall be 
suitable for the temperatures likely to be encoun* 
tered, or shall be provided with additional, insula- 
tion suitable for those temperatures. Such additio- 
nal insulation shall be fitted over the individual 
cores of the cable of flexible cord in such a way 
that the normal insulation of the cores is not 
relied upon to prevent a short circuit between 
conductors for an earth fault. 

Notb — Exposure of plastics-insulated cables to 
high temperature, even for short periods, may cause 
the insulation to soften. Continuous exposure of PVC 
compounds to temperatures above 115°Cmay contribute 
to the formation of corrosive products which can attack 
conductors and other metal-work. 



44 



IS : 732 • 1989 



8.3.1.3 In determining the normal opera- 
tional conditions of conductors and cable, account 
need not be taken of the minimum ambient tem- 
perature likely to occur. However, precautions shall 
be taken to avoid risk of mechanical damage to 
cables susceptible to low temperatures. 

8.3.1.4 The enclosures of wiring systems for 
conductors and cables shall be selected and instal- 
led so that they are suitable for the extremes of 
ambient temperature to which they are likely to 
be exposed in normal service. If a non-metallic or 
composite outlet box is used for the suspension of, 
or is in contact with, a luminaire and where a 
thermoplastic material ( for example PVC ) is the 
principal load-bearing member, care shall be 
taken that the temperature of the box does not 
■exceed 60°C and that the mass suspended from 
the box does not exceed 3 kg. 

Note — In determining the ambient temperature 
of such enclosures, account should be taken of the 
maximum normal operating temperatures of the conduc- 
tors of cables installed within them. 

8.3.1.5 In every vertical channel, duct, 
•ducting or trunking containing conductors or 
cables, internal barriers shall be provided so as to 
prevent the air at the top of the channel, duct, 
■ducting or trunking from attaining an excessively 
high temperature. The distance between barriers 
shall be the distance between floors or 5 m which- 
ever is less. 

Note — The fire barriers specified in 8.8.1 may 
serve also for compliance with 8.3.1.5. 

8.3.2 Presence of Water or Moisture 

8.3.2.1 Every wiring system shall either be 
installed where it will not be exposed to rain, 
-dripping water, steam, condensed water or accumu- 
lations of water or be of a type designed to with- 
stand such exposure. 

8.3.2.2 In damp situations and wherever 
they are exposed to the weather, all metal sheaths 
and armour of cables, metal conduit, ducts, duct- 
ing, trunking, clips and their fixings, shall be of 
corrosion-resisting material or finish and shall not 
be placed in contact with other metals with which 
they are liable to set up electrolytic action. 

8.3.2.3 Copper-clad aluminium conductors 
shall not be used in situations where the termina- 
tion of the conductors are likely to be exposed to 
sustained wet conditions. 

Note — 8.3.2.2 and 8.3.2.3 do not apply to situation 
which may be only initially damp during building 
construction. 

8.3.2.4 A plain aluminium conductor shall 
not be placed in contact with a terminal of brass 
or other metal having a high copper content, 
unless the terminal is suitably plated or other 
precautions are taken to maintain electrical 
-continuity. 



8.3.2.5 In any situation, the exposed conduc- 
tor and insulation at terminations and joints of 
cables insulated with impregnated paper shall be 
protected from ingress of moisture by being suit- 
ably sealed. 

8.3.2.6 The ends of mineral-insulated cables 
shall be protected from moisture, by being suitably 
sealed and the insulation shall be thoroughly dry 
before the sealing material is applied. Such seal- 
ing material, and any material used to insulate 
the conductors where they emerge from the 
insulation, shall have adequate insulating and 
moisture-proofing properties, and shall retain those 
properties throughout the range of temperatures to 
which they may be subjected in service. 

8.3.2.7 In damp situations, enclosures for 
cores of sheathed cables from which the sheath has 
been removed and for non-sheathed cables at 
terminations of conduit, duct, ducting or trunking 
systems shall be damp-proof and corrosion-resistant. 
Every joint in a cable shall be suitably protected 
against the effects of moisture. 

8.3.2.8 Conduit systems not designed to be 
sealed shall be provided with drainage outlets at 
any points in the installation where moisture 
might otherwise collect, 

8.3.2.9 Every entry to finished ducts, ducting 
or trunking shall be placed so as to prevent the 
ingress of water, or be protected against such 
ingress. 

8.3.3 Dust — Enclosures for conductors and 
their joints and terminations in onerous dust con- 
ditions shall have the degree of protection IP 5X. 

8.3.4 Corrosive or Polluting Substances 

8.3.4.1 All metalwork of wiring systems shall 
either be installed where it will not be exposed to 
corrosive substances, or be of a type or be protec- 
ted so as to withstand such exposure. Non-meta- 
llic materials of wiring systems shall not be 
placed in contact with materials likely to cause 
chemical deterioration of the wiring systems. Such 
materials shall cither be installed where they will 
not be exposed to contact with oil, creosote, and 
similar hydrocarbons, or be of a type designed to 
withstand such exposure. 

8.3.4.2 Soldering fluxes which remain acidic 
or corrosive at the completion of the soldering 
process shall not be used. 

8.3.5 Mechanical Stresses 

8.3.5.1 All conductors and cables shall be 
adequately protected against any risk of mechani- 
cal damage to which they may be liable in normal 
conditions of service. 



45 



IS t 732 • 1989 



8.3.5.2 Where cables are installed under 
floors or above ceilings they shall be run in such 
positions that they are not liable to be damaged 
by contact with the floor or the ceiling or their 
fixings. Where the cable passes through a timber 
joint within a floor or ceiling construction ( for 
example, under floorboards ), the cable shall be 
50 mm, measured vertically, from the top or 
bottom, as appropriate, of the joist. Alternatively, 
cables not protected by an earthed metallic sheath 
shall be protected by enclosure in earthed steel 
conduit securely supported, or by equivalent 
mechanical protection sufficient to prevent pene- 
tration of the cable by nails, screws, and the 
like. 

8.3.5.3 Where cables pass through holes in 
metalwork, precautions shall be taken to prevent 
abrasion of the cables on any sharp edges. 

8.3.5.4 Non-sheathed cables for fixed wiring 
shall be enclosed in conduit, duct, ducting or 
trunking. Such non-sheathed cables shall not be 
installed in ducts cast in-situ in concrete where any 
part of the completed duct is formed by the con- 
crete or screed, 

8.3.5.5 Gables buried direct in the ground 
shall be of a type incorporating an armour or 
metal sheath or both, or be of the PVC, insulated 
concentric type. Such cables shall be marked by 
cable covers or a suitable marking tape and be 
buried at a sufficient depth to avoid their being 
damaged by any disturbance of the ground 
reasonably likely to occur during the normal use 
of the premises. 

8.3.5.6 Gables to be installed in underground 
ducts or pipes shall be of a type incorporating a 
sheath and/or armour suitably resistant to any 
mechanical damage likely to be caused during 
drawing-in. 

8.3.5.7 Gables to be installed outdoors on 
walls and the like shall incorporate a sheath and/or 
armour suitably resistant to any mechanical 
damage likely to occur, or be contained in a 
conduit system or other enclosure affording ade- 
quate protection against such damage. 

8.3.5.8 Gables for overhead wiring between 
a building and a point of utilisation not attached 
there to ( for example, another building ) shall be 
so placed and at such a height as to be out of 
reach of any sources of mechanical damage 
reasonably to be foreseen in the normal use of the 
premises. Alternatively for spans in situations 
inaccessible to vehicular traffic, such cables may 
be installed in conduit or other enclosure afford- 
ing adequate protection against such damage. 

Note 1 — Bare or lightly insulated overhead con- 
ductors are required to be placed out of reach of persons 
and livestock, for compliance with 5.1.2.4. 

Note 2 — ■ See Appendix B for notes on methods of 
support. 



8.3.5.9 Flexible cords, where they are 
exposed to risk of mechanical damage, shall be of 
a type sheathed with rubber or PVG, and where 
necessary, shall also be armoured; provided that 
for domestic and similar applications where flexi- 
ble cords are subject only to moderate bending 
and/or wear, unkinkable flexible cords may be 
used. 

8.3.5.10 Braided circular twin and three- 
core flexible cords insulated with glass fibre shall 
be used only for luminaires or for other applica- 
tions where the cord is not subject to abrasion or 
undue flexing. 

8.3.5.11 Flexible cords shall not be used as 
fixed wiring, except as permitted by 8.3.5.13, 
unless contained in an enclosure affording mecha- 
nical protection. 

8.3.5.12 Flexible cables or flexible cords 
shall be used for connections to portable equip- 
ment. For the purpose of this clause an electric 
appliance of rated input exceeding 3 kW is 
cosidered not to be portable. Such flexible cables 
or flexible cords shall be of suitable length to avoid 
undue risk of mechanical damage. 

8.3.5.13 Exposed lengths of flexible cable or 
flexible cord used for final connections to fixed 
equipment shall be as shoit as possible and 
connected to the fixed wiring by a suitable acces- 
sory or an enclosure, by a suitable device or 
devices for overcurrent protection, isolation, and 
switching. 

8.3.5.14 Where a flexible cord supports or 
partly supports a luminaire, the maximum mass 
supported by the cord shall not exceed the appro- 
priate value indicated below: 

Nominal Cross-Sectional Maximum Mass 
Area of Conductor (kg) 

(mm*) 



0-5 

0-75 

1-0 

1-5 

25 

4 



2 
3 
5 

5-3 

8-8 

14-0 



8.3.5.15 In assessing risks of mechanical 
damage to cables, account shall be taken of any 
mechanical strains likely to be imposed during the 
normal process of erection of the cables. 

8.3.6 Damage by Fauna — In premises intended 
for livestock, all fixed wiring systems shall be in- 
accessible to livestock. Gables liable to attack by 
vermin shall be of a suitable type or be suitably 
protected. 



46 



IS i 732- 1989 



• « «i r>.i d-j:-j. - .- /t_ui ]...:_: _.._*„ „ 

installed in positions which may be exposed to 
direct sunlight shall be ' of a type resistant to 
damage by ultra-violet light. 

8.4 Identification 

8.4.1 Reference is drawn to IS : 11353-1986* 
on marking of conductors and apparatus terminals 
by colours and alphanumeric code. 

8.5 Prevention of Mutual Detrimental 
Influence 

8.5.1 Between Low Voltage Circuits and Circuits of 
Other Categories 

8.5.1.1 Low voltage circuits shall be segrega- 
ted from extra-low voltage circuits. 

8.5.1.2 Where an installation comprises 
circuits for telecommunication, fire-alarm or emer- 
gency lighting systems, as well as circuits operating 
at low voltage and connected directly to a mains 
supply system, precautions shall be taken, in 
accordance with clauses below, to prevent electrical 
contact ( and for fire-alarm circuits and emergency 
lighting circuits, physical contact ) between the 
cables of the various types of circuit. 

Note I — See the definition in Section 1 for 'circuit' 
which gives details of the three categories used in 
clauses below. 

Note 2 — Where it is proposed to instal cables of 
category 1 circuits in the same cable enclosure or duct 
as cables of a telecommunication system which may be 
connected to lines provided by a public telecommunica- 
tion system authority, the approval of that authority is 
necessary. 

Note 3 — Cables used to connect the battery 
chargers of self-contained luminaires to the normal 
mains circuit are not considered to be emergency light- 
ing circuits. 

8.5.1.3 Gables of category 1 circuits shall not 
be drawn into the same conduit, duct or ducting 
as cables of category 2 circuits, unless the latter 
cables are insulated in accordance with the 
requirements of these clauses for the highest 
voltage present in the category 1 circuits. 

8.5.1.4 Gables of category 1 circuits shall 
not in any circumstances be drawn into the same 
conduit, duct or ducting as cables of category 3 
circuits. * 

8.5.1.5 Where a common channel or trunk- 
ing is used to contain cables of category 1 and 
category 2 circuits, all cables connected to cate- 
gory 1 circuits shall be effectively partitioned from 
the cables of the category 2 circuits or alternatively 
the latter cables shall be insulated in accordance 
with the requirements of these clauses for the 
highest voltage present in the category 1 circuits 
( see also 8.5.1.7 ). 

8.5.1.6 Where category 3 circuits are instal- 
led in a channel or trunking containing circuits of 



♦Guide for uniform system of marking and identifica- 
tion of conductors and apparatus terminals. 



„„.. ~*i,„ *■ „ +u*>*~ ,-:..,.,,:«■., „u„ii i — „«„_ 

any i/uiui i*aii*i±\JM v, Lj4i»ai» vjji t^uita aiiou i^t; JLKicga* 

ted from the latter by continuous partitions such 
that the specified integrity of the category 3 
circuits is not reduced. These partitions shall also 
be provided at any common outlets in a trunking 
system accommodating category 3 circuits and cir- 
cuits of other categories. Where mineral-insulated 
cables are. used for category 3 circuits such 
partitions are not normally required. Where parti- 
tions are not used, the mineral-insulated cables 
shall be rated for exposed-to -touch conditions. 

8.5.1.7 In conduit, duct, ducting or trunking 
systems, controls or outlets for category 1 and 
category 2 circuits shall not be mounted in or 
on common boxes, switchplates or blocks. Where 
it becomes unavoidable the cables and connections 
of the two categories of circuit shall be partitioned 
by means of rigidly fixed screens or barriers. 

8.5.1.8 Where cores of category 1 and cate- 
gory 2 circuits are contained in a common multi- 
core cable, flexible cable or flexible cord, the cores 
of the category 2 circuits shall be insulated 
individually or collectively as a group, in accord- 
ance with the requirements of these clauses, for 
the highest voltage present in the category 1 
circuits, or alternatively, shall be separated from 
the cores of the category 1 Circuits by an earthed 
metal braid of equivalent current-carrying capa- 
city to that of the cores of the category 1 circuits. 
Where terminations of the two categories of 
circuit are mounted in or on common boxes, 
switchplates or blocks, they shall be partitioned in 
accordance with 8.5.1.7 of alternatively be 
mounted on separate and distinct terminal blocks 
adequately marked to indicate their function. 

8.5.1.9 Cores of category 1 and category 3 
circuits shall not in any circumstances be contained 
in a common multicore cable, flexible cable or 
flexible cord. 

8.5.2 Between Electrical Services and Exposed 
Metalwork of Other Services 

8.5.2.1 Metal sheaths and armour of all 
cables operating at low voltage, and metal 
conduits, ducts, ducting and trunking and bare 
protective conductors associated with such cables, 
which might otherwise come into fortuitous con- 
tact with other fixed metalwork shall be either 
effectually segregated therefrom, or effectually 
bonded thereto. ( Reference is also invited 
to IS : 3043-1987* ). 

8.5.2.2 Electrical services shall not be 

installed in the same conduit, ducting or trunking 
__ _: ~_ *..u-„ „r „i~„*_: 1 : c 

example air, gas, oil or water. 

8.5.2.3 No cables other than those which 
form part of lift installation and its supply feeder 
shall be run in a lift ( or hoist ) shaft. 

♦Code of practice for earthing (first revision ). 



47 



ISr 732.1989 



8.6 Accessibility 

8.6.1 Joints in non-flexible cables and joints be- 
tween non-flexible and flexible cables or cords 
shall be accessible for inspection. However, this 
requirement shall not apply to 'joints: 

a) in cable buried underground, 

b) enclosed in building materials, and 

c) made by welding, soldering, brazing or 
compression and contained within an 
enclosure ( such as a box ) , 

The joints mentioned in item (b), if inexcessible 
shall not be made by means of mechanical ' 
clamps. 

8.6.2 Inspection-type conduit fittings shall be 
so installed that they can remain accessible for 
such purposes as the withdrawal of existing cables 
or the installing of additional cables. 

8.7 Joints and Terminations 

8.7.1 Every connection at a cable termination 
or joint shall be mechanically and electrically 
sound, be protected against mechanical damage 
and any vibration liable to occur, shall not impose 
any appreciable mechanical strain on the fixing of 
the connection, and shall not cause any harmful 
mechanical damage to the cable conductor. Joints 
in non-flexible cables shall be made by soldering, 
brazing, welding, or mechanical clamps, or be of 
the compression type. All mechanical clamps and 
compression-type sockets shall securely retain all 
^jhe wires of the conductor. 

8.7.2 Terminations and joints shall be appro- 
priate to the size and type of conductor with 
which they are to be used. 

1 8.7.3 Terminations and joints shall be suitably 
inlsulated for the voltage of the circuits in which 
thiby are situated. 

8.7.4 Where a termination or joint in an insu- 
lated conductor, other than a protective conductor 
is fiot made in an accessory or luminaire comply- 
ing; with the appropriate Indian Standard, it shall 
be enclosed in material requisite qualities. Such 
an 'enclosure may be formed by part of an 
accessory or luminaire and a part of the building 
structure. 

8.7.5 Cores of sheathed cables from which 
the sheath has been removed and non-sheathed 
cables at the terminations of conduit, ducting or 
trunking shall be enclosed as specified above. 
Alternatively the enclosure may be a box comply- 
ing with appropriate Indian Standard. 

8.7.6 Terminations of mineral-insulated 
cables shall be provided with sleeves having a 
temperature rating similar to that of the seals. 

8.7.7 Gable glands shall securely retain with- 
out damage the outer sheath or armour of the 
cables. 



8.7.8 Appropriate cable coupers shall be used 
for connecting together lengths of flexible cable or 
flexible cord. 

8.7.9 Ends of lengths of conduit shall be free 
from burrs, and where they terminate at boxes, 
trunking and accessories not fitted with spout 
entries, shall be treated so as to obviate damage 
to cables. 

8.7.10 Substantial boxes of ample capacity shall 
be provided at every junction involving a cable 
connection in a conduit system. 

8.7.11 Every outlet for cables from a duct 
system or ducting system, every joint in such a 
system, and every joint between such a system and 
another type of duct, ducting, or conduit, shall be 
formed so that the joints are mechanically sound 
and that the cables drawn in are not liable to 
suffer damage, 

8.8 Fire Barriers — Where cables, conduits, 
ducts, ducting or trunking pass through fire- 
resistant structural elements such as floors and 
walls designated as fire barriers, the opening made 
shall be sealed according to the appropriate degree 
of fire resistance. In addition, where cables, 
conduits or conductors are installed in channels, 
ducts, ducting, trunking or shafts which pass 
through such elements, suitable internal fire- 
resistant barriers shall be provided to prevent the 
spread of fire. 

8.9 Supports, Bends and Space Factors 

8.9.1 Supports 

8.9.1.1 Every cable and conductor used at 
fixed wiring shall be supported in such a way that 
it is not exposed to undue mechanical strain and 
so that there is no appreciable mechanical strain 
on the terminations of the conductors, account 
being taken of mechanical strain imposed by the 
supported mass of the cable or conductor itself. 

8.9.1.2 All conduit, ducting and trunking 
shall be properly supported and of a type suitable 
for any risk of mechanical damage to which they 
may be liable in normal conditions of service or 
adequately protected against such damage. 

8.9.2 Bends 

8.9.2.1 The internal radius of every bend in- 
a non-flexible cable such as not to cause damage 
to the cable. 

8.9.2.2 The use of solid ( non-inspection ) 
conduit elbows or tees shall be restricted to: 

— ■ locations at the ends of conduits imme- 
diately behind a luminaire, outlet box or 
conduit fitting of the inspection type; and 

— one solid elbow located at a position not 
more than 500 mm from a readily accessi- 
ble outlet box in a conduit run not exceed- 
ing 10 m between two outlet points 



48 



IS: 732 -1980 



provided that all other bends on the conduit 
run are not more than the equivalent Of 
one right angle. 

8.9.2.3 The radius of every conduit bend 
shall be such as to allow compliance with 8.9.2.1 
for bends in cables and, in any event, the inner 
radius of the bend shall be not less than 2*5 times 
the outside diameter of the conduit. 

8.9.2.4 Every bend in a closed duct or duct- 
ing shall be of an inner radius allowing compliance 
with 8.9.2.1. 

8.9.3 Space Factors — The number of cable 
drawn into, or laid in, an enclosure of a wiring 
system shall be such that no damage is caused to 
the cable or to the enclosure during their installa- 
tion. 

9. SWITCHGEAR 

9.0 Common Requirements 

9.0.1 Where an item of switchgear is required 
by this code to disconnect all live conductors of a 
circuit, it shall be of a type such that the neutral 
conductor cannot be disconnected before the 
phase conductors and is reconnected at the same 
time as or before the phase conductors. 

9.0.2 Single-pole switchgear shall not be 
connected in the neutral conductor of TN or TT 
systems. 

9.0.3 Every fuse and circuit breaker shall be 
selected for a voltage not less than the maximum 
voltage difference ( rms value, for ac ) which 
normally develops under fault conditions. 

9.1 Devices for Protection Against Electric 
Shock ( see also Section 3 of IS i 3043-1987* ) 

9.1.1 Overcurrent Protective Devices 

9.1.1.1 For TN and TT systems, every over- 
current protective device which is to be uc*r-i also 
for protection against electric shock ( indirect 
contact ) shall be selected so that its operating 
time is: 

a) appropriate to the value of fault current 
that would flow in the event of a fault of 
negligible impedance between a phase 
conductor and exposed conductive parts, so 
that the permissible final temperature of 
the related protective conductor is not 
exceeded; and 

b) appropriate to compliance with the require- 
ments of 5.1.3.1(a)(iii). 

Not* — The operating time of an overcurrent 
protective device used in this way depends upon the 
value of the fault loop impedance which, in TT system 
may be liable to . considerable change with time, for 
example with seasonal variations. In the absence of 
reliable information in this respect protection against 
electric shock in TT systems is preferably to be provi- 
ded by means other than the overcurrent protective 
devices. The use of residual current devices is a 
preferred alternative. 



•Code of practice for earthing ( first revision ) . 



•9.1.1.2 Far.?TT systems, Where exposed 
conductive parts are connectedftogether and over* 
current protective devices are to be used to provide 
protection against electric shock in the' -event of a 
second fault, the requirements for the protective 
devices are similar to those for TN systems as 
specified in 9.1-1,1. 

9.1.1.3 The overcurrent protective devices 
shall conform to the relevant Indian Standards. 

9.1.1.4 When semi-enclosed fuse units are 
used for overcurrent protection, the nominal 
current rating of the circuit being protected to be 
indicated adjacent to the fuse. 

9.1.2 Residual Current Devices 

9.1.2.1 Residual current devices shall Be 
capable of disconnecting all the phase conductors 
of the circuit. 

9.1.2.2 The residual operating current of 
the protective device shall comply with the 
requirements of 5.1.3.1 (a) (v) as appropriate to 
the type of system earthing ( see IS : 3043-1987*). 
Where the characteristics of the current-using 
equipment to be supplied can be determined, it 
shall be verified that the vectorial sum of the 
leakage currents on the part of the installation 
situated on the load side of the device; and the 
vectorial sum of the leakage currents in normal 
service of the various items of equipment supplied 
by that part of the installation shall be less than 
one half the nominal residual operating current of 
the device. For TT and IT systems, allowance 
shall be made for any likely variation of earthing 
resistance with time, for example, with seasonal 
variations. 

Note — For large installation, sub-division of the 
earthing arrangements is likely to be necessary because 
of the magnitude of the total inherent leakage of the 
cables and other equipment. 

9.1.2.3 Where operation of a residual 
current device relies upon a separate auxiliary 
supply external to the device, then either: 

a) the device shall be of a type that will 
operate automatically in case of failure of 
the auxiliary supply, or 

b) the device shall incorporate, or be provided 
with, a supply which shall be available 
automatically upon failure of the auxiliary 
supply. 

9.1.2.4 Residual current device shall be 
located outside the magnetic field of other equip- 
ment, unless it is verified that their operation will 
not be impaired thereby. 

9.1.2.5 Where a residual current device for 
protection against indirect contact is used with, 
but separately from, overcurrent protective devices, 
it shall be verified that the residual current 
operated device is capable of withstanding, with- 
out damage, the thermal and mechanical stresses 



•Code ot practice for earthing (first rttrision ). 



49 



IS t 732 - 1989 



to which it is likely to be subjected in case of a 
short circuit occurring on the load side of the 
point at which it is installed. 

Note — The stresses mentioned here depend upon 
the prospective short-circuit current at the point where 
the residual current device is installed, and the operat- 
ing characteristics of the device providing short-circuit 
protection. 

9.2 Insulation Monitoring Device* — Under 
consideration. 

9.3 Devices for Protection Against Over* 
voltage/ Undervoltage and Coordination 
Between Various Devices — Under considera- 
tion. 

9.4 Isolating and Switching Devices 

9.4.1 General — Isolating and switching devices 
shall comply with the appropriate requirements of 
the following clauses. A common device may be 
used for more than one of these functions if the 
appropriate requirements for each function are 
met. 

9.4.2 Devices for Isolation 

9.4.2.1 Devices for isolation shall effectively 
disconnect all live supply conductors from the 



9.4.2.2 The isolating distances between 
contacts or other means of isolation when in open 
position shall be not less than those specified for 
isolators. 

9.4.2.3 Semiconductor devices shall not be 
used as isolators. 

9.4.2.4 The position of the contacts or other 
means of isolation shall be either externally visible 
or clearly and reliably indicated. An indication of 
the isolated position shall occur only when the 
specified isolating distance has been attained in 
each pole. 

9.4.2.5 Devices for isolation shall be selected 
and/ or installed in such a way as to prevent 
unintentional reclosure. 

Note — Such reclosure might be caused, for 
example, by mechanical shock and vibration. 

Provision shall be made for securing off-load 
devices for isolation against inadvertent and 
unauthorised operation. 

Nora — This provision may be achieved by locat- 
ing the off-load device in a lockable space or enclosure 
accessible only to skilled persons, or by padlocking. 
Alternatively, the off-load device may be interlocked 
with a load-breaking device. 

9.4.2.6 Isolation shall be achieved preferably 
by the use of a multipole device cutting off all 
poles of the supply or, alternatively, by the use of 
single-pole devices which are situated adjacent to 
each other. This requirement does not apply to 
neutral links in TN-S systems. 



9.4.3 Devices for Switching Off for Mechanical 
Maintenance 

9.4.3.1 Devices for switching off for mecha- 
nical maintenance shall be inserted where practi- 
cable in the main supply circuit. Alternatively, 
such devices may be inserted in the control circuit 
provided that supplementary precautions are 
taken to provide a degree of safety equivalent to 
that of „ interruption of the main supply, for 
examplqwhere such an arrangement is specified 
in the appropriate Indian Standard. 

9.4.3.2 Devices for switching off for mecha- 
nical maintenance of or control switches for such 
devices shall be manually initiated and shall have 
an externally visible contact gap or a clearly and 
reliably indicated OFF or OPEN position. Indi- 
cation of that position shall occur only when the 
OFF or OPEN position on each pole has been 
attained. 

9.4.33 Devices for switching off for mecha- 
nical maintenance shall be selected and/or installed 
in such a way as to prevent unintentional 
reclosure. 

Note — Such reclosure might be caused, for exam- 
ple, by mechanical shock and vibration. 

9.43.4 Where switches are used as devices 
for switching off for mechanical maintenance, 
they shall be capable of cutting off the full load 
current of the relevant part of the installation. 

9.4.4 Devices for Emergency Switching 

9.4.4.1 Means of interrupting the supply for 
the purpose of emergency shall be capable of 
cutting off the full load current of the relevant 
part of the installation. Where appropriate, due 
account shall be taken of stalled motor conditions. 

9.4.4.2 Means for emergency switching shall 
consist of: 

— a single switching device directly cutting off 
the incoming supply, or 

— a combination of several items of equip- 
ment operated by one initiation only and 
resulting in the removal of the hazard by 
cutting off the appropriate supply; emer- 
gency stopping may include the retention 
of supply for electric breaking facilities. 

Plugs and socket outlets shall not be used for 
emergency switching. 

9.4.4.3 Devices for emergency switching 
shall be, where practicable, manually operated, 
directly interrupting the main circuit. Devices such 
as circuit-breakers and contractors operated by 
remote control shall open on de-energisation of 
the coils, or other techniques of suitable reliability 
shall be employed. 



50 



IS • 732 - 19S9 



9.4.4.4 The operating means ( such as 
handles and push buttons ) for devices for emer- 
gency switching shall be clearly identifiable and 
preferably coloured red. They shall be installed in 
a readily accessible position where the hazard 
might occur and, where appropriate; at any addi- 
tional remote position from which the device for 
emergency switching may need to be operated. 

9.4.4.5 The operating means of the device 
for emergency switching shall be of the latching 
type or capable of being restrained in the OFF or 
STOP position. A device in which the operating 
means automatically reset is permitted where b«th 
the operating means and the means of re -energis- 
ing are under the control of one and the same 
person. The release of the emergency switching 
device shall not re-energise the equipment 
concerned, unless an appropriate warning that the 
equipment may restart automatically is clearly 
indicated. 

9.4.4.6 Every fireman's emergency switch 
provided for compliance with 5.6.3 shall: 

a) be coloured red and have fixed on or near 
it a nameplate marked with the words 
'FIREMAN'S SWITCH', the plate being 
the minimum size 150 X 100 mm, in 
lettering easily legible from a distance 
appropriate to the site conditions, but not 
less than 13 mm high; 

b) have its ON and OFF positions clearly 
indicated by lettering legible to a person 
standing on the ground at the intended 
site, and the OFF position shall be at the 
top; and 

c) preferably, be provided with a lock or 
catch to prevent the switch being inadver- 
tently returned to the ON position. 

Note — It is desirable that the nameplate mentio- 
ned in (a) above be marked also with the name of the 
company which installed or which main.-!. is i if 
different ) the installation concerned. 

9.4.5 Devices for Functional Switching 

9.4.5.1 Plugs and socket outlets of rating not 
exceeding 1 6 A may be used as switching devices 
but not for emergency switching (set also 9.4.4.2) . 
A plug and socket outlet of rating exceeding 16 A 
ac, may be Used as a switching device ( other than 
an emergency switching device ) where the plug 
and socket outlet has a breaking capacity appro- 
priate to the use intended. Plugs and socket 
outlets of rating exceeding 16 A shall not be used 
as switching devices for dc circuits. 

9.4.5.2 Every switch for discharge lighting 
circuit shall be designed and marked for such 
purposes. Alternatively, it shall have a nominal 
current not less than twice the total steady current 
which it is required to carry or, if used to control 
both filament lighting and discharge lighting, shall 
have a nominal current not less than the sum of 
the current of the filament lamps and twice the 
total steady current of the discharge lamps. 



10. EARTHING ARRANGEMENT AND 
PROTECTIVE CONDUCTORS ( see IS i 
3043-1987* ) 

11. SUPPLIES FOR SAFETY SERVICES 

11.1 General 

11.1.1 For safety services, a source of supply 
shall be selected which will maintain a supply for 
adequate duration. 

11.1.2 For safety services required to operate 
in fire conditions, all equipment shall be provided, 
either by construction or by erection, with protec- 
tion providing fire resistance of adequate 
duration. 

11.1.3 Protective measures against indirect 
contact without automatic disconnection at the 
first fault are preferred. In IT systems, continuous 
insulation monitoring devices shall be provided 
which give an audible and visible indication of a 
first fault. 

11.2 Sources 

Note — Starter-type batteries for vehicles will 
generally not fulfil the requirements for sources for 
safety services. 

11.2.1 Sources for safety services shall be 
installed as fixed equipment and in such a manner 
that they cannot be adversely affected, by failure 
of the normal source. 

11.2.2 Sources for safety services shall be placed 
in a suitable location and be accessible only to 
skilled or instructed persons. 

11.2.3 A single source for safety services shall 
not be used for other purposes. However, where 
more than one source is available, such sources 
may supply standby systems provided that, in the 
event of failure of one source, the energy remain- 
ing available will be sufficient for the starting and 
operation of all safety services: this generally 
necessitates the automatic off-loading of equipment 
not providing safety services. 

11.2.4 Clauses 11.2.1 to 11.2.3 do not apply to 
equipment individually supplied by self-contained 
batteries. 

11.3 Circuits 

11.3.1 Circuits of safety services shall be inde- 
pendent of other circuit. 

Note — This means that an electrical fault or any 
intervention or modification in one system will not 
affect the correct functioning of the other. This may 
necessitate separation by fire-resistant materials or use 
of different routes or enclosures. 

11.3.2 Circuits of safety services shall not pass 
through locations exposed to fire risk unless the 
wiring systems used are fire resistant. 

Nots — Wber« practicable the passage of circuits 
through locations presenting to a fire risk or explosion 
risk should be avoided. 



•Code of practice for earthing {first uoision ). 



51 



IS i 732-1989 



11.3.3 The protection against overload may be 
omitted. 

11.3.4 Overcurrent protective device shall be 
selected and erected so as to avoid an overcurrent 
in one circuit imparing the correct operation of 
other circuits of safety services. 

11.3.5 Switchgear and controlgear, except 
alarm devices, shall be clearly identified and 
grouped in locations accessible only to skilled or 
instructed persons. Alarm devices shall be clearly 
identified. 

11.4 Utilisation Equipment — In equipment 
supplied by two different circuits, a la ult occurring 
in one circuit shall not impair the protection 
against electric shock nor the correct operation of 
the other circuit. Such equipment shall be selec- 
ted to the protective conductors of both circuits, 
if necessary. 

11.5 Special Requirements for Safety Service 
Having Sources Not Capable of Operation 
in Parallel 



11.5.1 Precautions shall be taken to prevent 
the paralleling of the sources, for example, by 
mechanical interlocking. 

11.5.2 The requirements of these clauses for 
protection against short circuit and indirect 
contact shall be met for each source. 

11.6 Special Requirements for Safety 
Services Having Sources Capable of Opera- 
tion in Parallel 

Notk — St* also 4.1.3.2. 

11.6.1 The requirements of these clauses for 
protection against short circuit and against 
indirect contact shall be met whether the installa- 
tion is supplied by either of the two sources or by 
both in parallel. 

11.7 Specific Guidelines for Individual 
Equipment — For specific guidelines for indivi- 
dual equipment, fittings and accessories, reference 
is invited to Appendices C and D. 



SECTION 5 INSPECTION AND TESTING 



12. INITIAL INSPECTION AND TESTING 

12.1 General 

12.1.1 Every installation shall, on completion 
and before being energised, be inspected and 
tested in accordance with the requirements of this 
section to verify, as far as practicable, that the 
requirements of these clauses have been met. 

The methods of test shall be such that no 
danger to persons or property or damage to 
equipment can occur even if the circuit tested is 
defective. 

12.2 Visual Inspection 

12.2.1 A visual inspection shall be made to 
verify that the installed electrical equipment is: 

— in compliance with the applicable Indian 
Standards ( this may be ascertained by 
mark or by certification furnished by the 
installer or by the manufacturer ), 

— correctly selected and erected in accord- 
ance with this code, and 

— not visibly damaged so as to impair safety. 

Note — Appendix E lists the principal features of 
an installation to be visually inspected in order to 
verify compliance with this code. 

12.3 Testing 

12.3.1 General — The following items, where 
relevant, shall be tested in the sequence indicated. 
Standard methods of testing, in respect of some of 
the following clauses of this section, are given in 



Appendix C, the use of other methods is not pre- 
cluded provided that they give no less effective 
results: 

a) Continuity of ring final circuit conductors, 

b) Continuity of protective conductors^, includ- 
ing main and supplementary equipotential 
bonding, 

c) Earth electrode resistance, 

d) Insulation resistance, 

e) Insulation of site-built assemblies, 

f) Protection by electrical separation, 

g) Protection by barriers or enclosures provi- 
ded during erection, 

h) Insulation of non-conducting floors and 

walls, 
j) Polarity, 

k) Earth fault loop impedance, 
m) Operation of residual current devices and 

fault-voltage operated protective devices. 

In the event of any test indicating failure to 
comply, that test and those preceding, the results 
of which may have been influenced by the fault 
indicated, shall be repeated after the fault has 
been rectified. 



12.3.2 Continuity of Ring Final Circuit Con- 
ductors — A test shall be made to verify the con- 
tinuity of all conductors ( including the protec- 
tive conductor ) of every ring final circuit. 



52 



IS: 732 -1989 



12.3.3 Continuity of Protective Conductor — Every 
protective conductor shall be separately tested to 
verify that it is electrically sound and correctly 
connected. This test shall include all conductors 
and any extraneous conductive parts used for 
equipotential bonding. 

12.3.4 Earth Electrode Resistance — Where it is 
necessary to measure the resistance of an earth 
electrode, the test method described in IS : 3043- 
1987* shall be used. 

12.3.5 Insulation Resistance 

12.3.5.1 The tests described below shall be 
made before the installation is permanently con- 
nected to the supply. For these tests large installa- 
tions may be divided into groups of outlets, each 
containing not less than 50 outlets. For the pur- 
poses of this code the term 'outlet' includes every 
point and every switch except that a socket 
outlet, appliance or luminaire incorporating a 
switch is regarded as one outlet. The test voltage 
for insulation resistance measurement shall be: 



for extra low voltage 
circuits 

for 250-500 V circuits 

for circuits above 500 V 



— Up to 250-500 V 

— 1 000 V 

— 2-5 kV 



12.3.5.2 When measured with all fuse links 
in place, all switches ( including, if practicable, 
-the main switch ) closed and, except for TN-G 
systems, all poles or phases of the wiring electri- 
cally connected together, the insulation resistance 
to earth shall be not less than 1 megohm. 

12.3.5.3 When measured between all the 
conductors connected to any one phase or pole of 
the supply and, in turn, all conductors connected 
to each other phase or pole, the insulation resis- 
tance shall be not less than 1 megohm. Wherever 
practicable, so that all parts of the wiring may be 
tested, all lamps shall be removed and all current- 
using equipment shall be disconnected and all 
local switches controlling such lamps or other 
equipment shall be closed. Where the removal of 
lamps and/or the disconnection of current-using 
equipment is impracticable, the local switches 
controlling such lamps and/or equipment shall be 
open. Particular attention shall be given to the 
presence of electronic devices connected in the 
installation and such devices shall be isolated so 
that they are not damaged by the test voltage. 

12.3.5.4 Where equipment is disconnected 
for the tests prescribed above, and the equipment 
has exposed conductive parts required by these 
clauses to be connected to protective conductors, 
the insulation resistance between the exposed 
conductive parts and all live parts of the equip- 
ment shall be measured separately and shall com- 
ply with the requirements of the appropriate 
Indian Standard the insulation resistance shall be 
not less than 0-5 megohm. 



•Code of practice for earthing {first revision). 



12.3.6 Insulation of Site-Built Assemblies 

12.3.6.1 Where protection against direct 
contact is intended to be afforded by insulation 
applied to live parts during erection in accord- 
ance with 5.1.2.1 (a), it shall be verified that the 
insulation is capable of withstanding, without 
breakdown or fiashover, an applied test voltage 
equivalent to that specified in the Indian Stan- 
dard for similar factory-built equipment. 

12.3.6.2 Where protection against indirect 
contact is provided by supplementary insulation 
applied to equipment during erection in accord- 
ance with 5.1.3.2, it shall be verified by test: 

— that the insulating enclosure affords a 
degree of protection not less than IP2X, 
and 

— that the insulating enclosure is capable of 
withstanding, without breakdown or flash- 
over, an applied test voltage equivalent to 
that specified in the Indian Standard for 
similar factory built-equipment. 

12.3.7 Electrical Separation of Circuits — Where 
protection against electric shock is provided by 
safety extra-low voltage or by electrical separa- 
tion, the electrical separation of the separated 
circuits shall be inspected and/or tested. 

Where the source of the separated circuit is 
other than a safety isolating transformer or a 
source independent of a higher voltage circuit, it 
shall be verified that the" source provides a degree 
of safety equivalent to that of a safety isolating 
transformer, if necessary by performing the appli- 
cable tests of insulation resistance and electric 
strength. 

It shall also be verified that the live parts of 
equipment of the separated circuit, other than 
cables, have a degree of electrical separation 
from other circuits not less than that between the 
input and output windings of a safety isolating 
transformer, if necessary by performing the app- 
licable tests of insulation resistance and electric 
strength. 

12:3.8 Protection Against Direct Contact by Barriers 
or Enclosures Provided During Erection — Where 
protection against direct contact is intended to 
be afforded by barriers or enclosures provided 
during erection in accordance with 5.1.2.2, it 
shall be verified by test that the enclosures or 
barriers afford a degree of protection 'not less than 
IP2X or IP4X as appropriate. 

12.3.9 Insulation of Nonconducting Floors and 
Walls — Where protection against indirect con- 
tact is to be provided by a non-conducting loca- 
tion the resistance of the floors and walls of the 
location to the main protective conductor of the 
installation shall be measured at not less than 
three points on each relevant surface one of which 
shall be not less than 1 m and not more than 
1*2 m from any extraneous conductive parts, it 



53 



IS : 732 - 1989 



shall be able to withstand a test voltage of at least 
2 kV, and shall not pass a leakage current exceed- 
ing 1 mA in normal conditions of use. 

12.3.10 Polarity — A test of polarity shall be 
made and it shall be verified that all fuses and 
single-pole control devices are connected in the 
phase conductor only, that centre-contact 
bayonet and Edison-type screw lampholders in 
circuits having an earthed neutral conductor, 
have their outer or screwed contacts connected to 
that conductor, and that wiring has been 
correctly connected to socket outlets. 

12.3.11 Earth Fault Loop Impedance — Where 
protective measures are used which require a 
knowledge of earth fault loop impedance, the 



relevant impedance shall be measured, or deter- 
mined by an equally effective method. 

12.3.12 Operation of Residual Current Operated 
and Fault-Voltage Operated Protective Devices — 
Where protection against indirect contact is to be 
provided by a residual current device or a fault- 
voltage operated protective device, its effecti- 
veness shall be verified by a test simulating an 
appropriate fault condition and independent of 
any test facility incorporated in the device. 

13. ALTERATIONS TO INSTALLATIONS 

13.1 In case of an alteration to an existing ins- 
tallation, it shall be verified that the installation 
after the alteration complies with this code and 
does irot impair the safety of the existing installa- 
tion. 



APPENDIX A 

( Clause 8.1.7.1 ) 

TYPES OF WIRING SYSTEMS AND THEIR SELECTION 



Notk — Other types of wiring system*, not covered 
in this Appendix, may be used provided they comply 
with the general rules of this code . 

A-l. The method of installation of a wiring system 
in relation to the type of conductor cable used 
shall be in accordance with Table 2. 



A-2. The method of installation of a wiring system 
in relation to the situation concerned shall be in 
accordance with Table 3. 



A-3. Examples of wiring 
in Tables 2, 3 and 4. 



systems are shown 



TABLE 2 SELECTION OF WIRING SYSTEMS IN RELATION TO CONDUCTORS 

{ Clause A-3 ) 



Conductors and 



Method or Installation 



VJABLB8 


Without 


Clipped 


Conduit 


Cable 


Cable 


Cable 


On 


Support 




Fixing 


Direct 




Trunking 

(Including 

Skirting 

Trunking, 
Flush 
Floor 

Trunking) 


Ducting 


Ladder, 
Cable 
Tray, 
Cable 

Brackets 


Insulators 


Wire 


(I) 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


(5) 


(6) 


(7) 


(8) 


0> 


Bare conductors 


X 


X 


X 


X 


X 


X 


V 


X 


Insulated conductors 


X 


X 


V 


V 


V 


X 


V 


X 


Sheathed cables 


















(including armour- 


















ed and mineral 


















insulated) 


















Multi-core 


V 


V 


V 


V 


V 


V 


— 


V 


Single-core 


— 


V 


V 


V 


V 


V 


— 


V 


Key 


















V ! Permitted 
















X : Not permitted 
















— : Not applicable, or not normally 


used in practice 











54 



IS s 732 - 1M9 



TABLE 3 ERECTION OF WIRING SYSTEMS IN RELATION TO SITUATION 

( Clous* A-3 ) 



Situations 






Methoj 


o or Installation 










Without 
Fixing 


Clipped 
Direct 


Conduit 


Cable 

Trunking 

(Including 

Skirting 

Trunking, 

Flush 

Floor 

Trunking) 


Cable 
Ducting 


Cable 
Ladder, 
Cable 
Tray, 
Cable 
Brackete 


On 
Insulators 


Support 
Wire 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


(*) 


(5) 


(6) 


(7) 


(8) 


(9) 


Building voids 


21, 25, 73, 
74 


— 


22, 73, 74 


X 


23 


12, 13, 14, 
15, 16 


X 


X 


Cable channel 


43 


43 


41,42 


— 


—— 


12, 13, 14, 
15, 16 


X 


X 


Embedded in ground 


62,63 


— 


61 


X 


61 


— 


X 


X 


Embedded in 


52,53 


51 


1,2,5 


33 


24 


— 


X 


X 


structure 


















Surface mounted 


X 


11 


3 


31,32, 71, 
72 


4 


12,13,14, 
15,16 


18 


X 


Overhead 


X 


X 


— 


34 


X 


12, 13, 14, 
15,16 


18 


17 


Immersed 


81 


81 


— 


X 


— 


— 


X 


X 



Key 



Numbers : Permitted ( Number refers to Table 4 ) 
X : Not permitted 
— : Not applicable or not normally used in practice. 



TABLE 4 EXAMPLES OF WIRING SYSTEMS 

( Clause A-3 ) 

N'otb — The illustrations are not intended to depict actual product or installation practice but are indicative 
of the method described. 



Example 



Description 



Rsr 




ROOM 



ROOM 



Insulated conductors in conduits in insulating 
walls 



Multicore cables in conduits in insulating walls 



Insulated conductors in conduits on a wall 



( Continued ) 



55 



IS t 732 - 1989 



TABLE 4 EXAMPLES OF WIRING SYSTEMS —G»nid 
Example Dbscbiption 



Rbf 



1 



Insulated conductors in cable ducting on a wall 




Insulated conductors in conduit in masonry 



i 




i 



Sheathed and/or armoured cables and mineral iosuh 
ted cables on or spaced from a wall or ceiling 



U 




On unperf orated trays 



12 



On perforated trays 



13 



-0 



% 



On brackets 



On cleats 



14 



15 






On ladder 



Sheathed single core or multicore cables suspended 
from or incorporating a support wire 



16- 



17 



( Continued ) 



56 



IS t 732 - 1989 



TABLE 4 EXAMPLES OF WIRING SYSTEMS - Contd 
ExAirFLB Description 



7T 



Bare or insulated conductors on insulators 



Rkf 



18 




Sheathed single core or multicore cables in building 
voids 



21 




Insulated conductors in conduit in building voids 



22 



,,({///V,///// , m 



®L ML 

MM) @M> 



>/7 7/S/7 //' />' 



Insulated conductors in cable ducting in building 
voids 



23 



SS/////SSSS /////. 



®) J§L 

1(1) Wm 



7777777777 



Insulated conductors in cable ducting in masonry 



24 




Sheathed single core or multicore cables: 

a) in ceiling void, and 

b) in suspended floor 



25 



Ml 



Insulated conductors in cable trunking on a wall: 
a) Run horizontally 



31 



^4 



< W f Wi" 



b) Run vertically 



32 






*V A 



*:.».:--<s»i*v.- 



c) Insulated conductors in flush cable- trunking 33 

( Continued ) 



57 



IS : 732 - 1989 



TABLE 4 EXAMPLES OF WIRING SYSTEMS - Contd 
Example Dkscbiptioh 

'//////St 



d) Insulated conductors in suspended cable 
trunk ing 




Rsr 



34 




e) Insulated conductors in conduits in enclosed 
cable channels, run horizontally or vertically 



41 



/A VJ1 Y/A V/A V/A T///l:V X. 







S' 



S3T 



f) Insulated conductors in conduits in ventilated 
cable channels in floor 



42 



>/JA VSA VJA V/A VJA VSSj 




P 



g) Sheathed single-core or multi-core cables in 
open or ventilated cable channels run hori- 
zontally or vertically 



43 




ROOM 



Sheathed multi-core cables direct in insulating walls 



Sheathed single-core or multi-core cables direct in 
masonry without added mechanical protection 



51 



52 




Sheathed single-core or multi-core cables direct in 53 

masonry — with added mechanical protection. 

( Continued ) 



58 



18 t 732 - 1989 



TABLE 4 EXAMPLES OF WIRING SYSTEMS — Contd 
Example Dksckiptioh 



Rxr 




WiMjNj^-.SW-t'i-i'»w;-:-^x: 




Sheathed single-core or multi-core cables in conduits 
or cable ducting in the ground 



61 



«-jfe^.-X.V-: ' ...{.!:-:^M-hV 




Sheathed single-core or multi-core cables in the ground 
without added mechanical protection 



62 









Sheathed single-core or multi-core cables in the 
ground with added mechanical protection 



63 



W///M//V, 



Insulated conductors run in mouldings 



71 



€ 
C 



?7 M//>/SM 



Insulated conductors in skirting trunking 



72 




Insulated conductors in conduits or sheathed single 
core of multicore cables in architraves 



( Continued 



I8t732-19M 



TABLE 4 EXAMPLES OP WIRING SYSTEMS — C^ntd 
Example Description 




Insulated conductors in conduits or sheathed single- 
core or multi-core cables in window frame 



74 




Sheathed cables immersed in water 



81 



APPENDIX B 

( Clause 8 3.5.8 ) 

METHODS OF INTERNAL WIRING 



B-l. CLEATED WIRING SYSTEM 

B-l.I General — This system shall not be 
employed for wiring on damp walls or ceiling. 

B-l .2 Accessibility — All cleated wiring shall 
be run, as far as practicable, so as to be visible 
except in positions where they would be liable to 
mechanical injury and where they are less than 
1 -5 m above the floor, in which cases they shall be 
adequately protected. 

B-l*3 Types of Gables — Vulcanized rubber 
insulated cables; plastic ( PVG and polyethylene ) 
insulated cables, braided or unbr aided; and any 
other approved insulated cables shall be used 
without any further protection. 

B-l. 4 Cleats — All cleats shall consist of two 
parts, a base piece and a cap. A Bpecial pattern of 
cleat may be used, if necessary, where conductors 
pass round corners, so that there may be no risk 
of the conductors touching the wall owing to the 
sagging or stretching. Cleats shall be fixed at 
distances not greater than 60 cm apart and at 
regular intervals. 

B-l. 5 Where cleated wiring is laid along iron 
joist or any metal, spacing between such metal 
and porcelain cleats shall be inserted either with 
varnished wood fillet or varnished, wood clamp 
securely fixed as would be approved so as to 
prevent conductors coming in contact with such 
metal along which they are passing. 

B-l. 6 Fixing of Cleats 

B-l. 6.1 In ordinary cases, cleats shall be 
attached to plugs arranged in a suitable manner. 



B-l. 6.2 Where practicable the same method 
shall be adopted in the cases of stone walls, but 
when owing to irregular coursing or other reasons 
it is impracticable to fix the cleats in a regular and 
workman like manner, a wood batten shall be 
provided and fixed with not less than one plug per 
1*25 ro run. The batten shall be of seasoned teak 
or other suitable seasoned hardwood 2 cm thick 
and 2-5 cm wider than the cleat used, it shall be 
chamfered on the edges, wrought all over and 
varnished with two coats of varnish conforming 
to IS : 347-1975* or painted as may be required. 

B-l .7 Distance Between Wires — For voltages 
up to 250 volts, cleats shall be of such dimensions 
that in the case of branch loads, conductors shall 
not be less than 2*5 cm apart centre to centre and 
in the case of submains not less than 4 cm apart 
centre to 'centre, provided that this shall not 
apply, if the cable used is twin-core. Care shall be 
taken in selecting size of cleats particularly for 
branch distribution wiring where two-way and 
three-way porcelain cleats are essential, and the 
difference in size shall be reasonable. Care shall 
also be taken that grooves of porcelain cleats do 
not compress the insulation nor be too wide for a 
very loose fit. Under no circumstances two wires 
shall be placed in one groove of porcelain cleats. 

B-l .8 Crossing of Conductors 

B-l .8.1 Where cleated conductors cross each 
other they shall be separated by an insulating 
bridging piece, which will rigidly maintain a 
distance of at least 1*3 cm between the conductors 
except when the cable used is twin-core. 



•Specification for varnish, shellac, for general purposes 
(first revision). 



60 



IS t 732 - 1989 



B-l.8.2 In open type wiring, joint cut-outs 
or fuse or fuse cut-outs shall not be inserted for 
any purpose, but where joints are required for 
connecting bifurcating wires, junction boxes of 
wooden or other insulating material with porcelain 
connectors inside shall be used. 

B-1.9 Protection Near Floor 

B-l.9.1 No cleated wiring shall be left unpro- 
tected up to 1-5 m above floor level. When 
brought through the floor it shall be enclosed in 
conduit in the manner specified in B-2.9. 

B-l.9.2 As far as possible, no open type of 
wiring shall run within floors, walls, partitions, 
ceilings, roof spaces or other concealed spaces in 
which they are not normally open to view; in such 
cases conductors shall be carried through steel 
conduit pipe [see IS : 9537 (Part 2 )-1981* ] 
with all screwed accessories, keeping mechanical 
continuity throughout the entire layout, and such 
pipe work shall be earthed and properly bushed 
on all open ends to prevent abrasion of cables. 

B-l.9.3 At the time of laying and drawing of 
conductors, care shall be taken to keep the wires 
straight, tight and rigid without any twist. 

B-l.9.4 All wooden fittings, such as boards, 
blocks, etc, shall be of well-seasoned teak wood or 
of suitable insulating material and shall be of 
double type, that is, separate base and top. The 
wooden boards shall be well varnished on all sides 
( both inside and outside ) and may be mounted 
with suitable porcelain insulators behind the 
boards. 

B-2. WOOD CASING WIRING SYSTEM 

B-2.1 General — This system of wiring is suitable 
for low voltage installation where vulcanized 
rubber insulated cables, plastic insulated cables or 
other suitable insulated cables shall be used in the 
wiring work and carried within wood casing 
enclosure. Wood casing wiring system shall not be 
used in damp places or in ill-ventilated places, 
unless suitable precautions are taken. 

B-2.2 Material and Pattern of Casing — All 

casing shall be of seasoned teak wood or any other 
approved hardwood, free from knots, shakes, saps, 
or other defects, all sides planed with smooth 
finish, and all sides well varnished ( both inside 
and outside ) with pure shellac varnish ( see IS : 
347-1 975f ). The casing shall have grooved body 
with beaded or plain moulded cover as desired. 

B-2. 3 Dimensions of Casing — The sizes of 
casing and capping for various sizes of 250 V 
grade insulated cables in a groove shall be in 
accordance with those specified in Table 5. 



♦Specification for conduits for electrical installations: 
Part 2 Rigid steel conduits. 

fSpecification for varnish, shellac for general purposes 
{first revision ). 



B-2.4 Bunching of Circuits — Conductor*, of 
opposite polarity or different phases shall not be 
bunched in one groove in wood casing. 

Note — Lengths of conductors of the same polarity 
or phase, and free joints, may be bunched, if so 
desired. 

B-2.5 Attachment of Casing to Wall and 
Ceiling — All casing shall be fixed by means of 
suitable flat-head wood screws to plugs at an 
interval not exceeding 90 cm for sizes up to 64 mm 
casing and not exceeding 60 cm for sizes above 
64 mm casing. Screw heads shall be countersunk 
within the dividing wall of the grooves (in the case 
of three-grooved casing, two screws shall be insert- 
ed on the two dividing walls in a workmanlike 
manner ). All casing shall be spaced from the 
wall or ceiling by means of porcelain disc insula- 
tors not less than 6-5 mm thick. Casing shall be 
used only on dry walls and ceilings avoiding out- 
side walls, as far as possible, and shall not be 
buried in walls or ceilings under plaster, nor fixed 
in proximity to gas, steam or water pipes or imme- 
diately below the latter. Casing under steel joists 
shall be secured by hoop-iron or by approved 
wood clamps, and spaced with disc insulators. 

B-2.6 Attachment of Capping — All capping 
shall be attached to the casing ( after all insulated 
wires are laid inside grooves ) by round-head 
screws ( rust resisting ) fixed on edges and screw- 
ed to outer walls of the casing at an interval not 
exceeding 15 cm crosswise (that is, 30 cm between 
two successive screws on each side ) for all sizes 
up to 64 mm casing and capping. For sizes above 
64 mm similar additional round-head screws shall 
be fixed on the centre-wall ( or alternative walls 
in cases of 3 grooves ) at an interval of 45 cm. 

Note — Care shall be taken in fixing screws on 
cappings so that they do not pierce through the walls of 
casing and damage the insulation. 

B-2.7 Joints in Casing and Capping — Casing 
and capping shall be run in lengths as long as 
possible. All joints shall be scarfed or cut diago- 
nally in longitudinal section and shall be smoothed 
down by fitting to make joints a very close fit as 
far as possible. They shall be secured at joints 
with two or more screws as would be necessary. 
Joints in capping shall not overlap those in the 
casing. 

B-2.8 Layout of Wood Casing Wiring — Lay- 
out of wood casing wiring shall be such as to 
avoid corners as far as possible and avoid crossing 
of conductors inside the casing. Where conductors 
have to cross corners, teak wood solid corner 
pieces of a radius not less than 7*5 cm and of the 
same width as that of casing with the same finish 
as that of capping shall be used with grooves at the 
bottom for conductors. Where crossing of wires is 
unavoidable and a junction box is not used, a 
bridge piece of casing shall be fixed on the top of 
casing with neat finish and shall pass conductor^ 
avoiding crossing. 



61 



IS : 732 • 1989 
























TABLE 5 SIZE OF WOOD CASING AND CAPPING, 


AND NUMBER OF CABLES 




THAT MAY BE DRAWN IN ONE GROOVE OF THE CASING 










( Clause B-2.3 ) 














Width of 


casing or capping , mm 




38 


44 




51 




64 


76 


89 


102 


No. of grooves 




2 


2 




2 




2 


2 


2 


2 


Width of | 


grooves, mm 




6 


6 




9 




13 


16 


16 


19 


Width of 


dividing fillet, mm 




12 


12 




13 




18 


24 


35 


38 


Thickness of outer wall, mm 




7 


10 




10 




10 


10 


11 


13 


Thickness of casing, mm 




16 


16 




19 




19 


25 


32 


32 


Thicknes of capping, mm 




6 


6 




10 




10 


10 


13 


13 


Thickness 


of the back under the 




6 


6 




6 




10 


10 


10 


13 


groove, 


mm 






















Length, m 










2*5 to 3-0 








Size of Cable 


Number op 


Cables That 


MAY BE 


Drawn in 


One Groove 


Nominal 


Number and 




















> 


Cross 


Diameter 






















Sectional 


( in mm ) of 






















Area, 


Wires 






















mm* 
























10 


1/1-12* 


2 


2 




3 




3 




9 


12 


12 


1-5 


1/1-40 


1 


1 




2 




2 




8 


12 


12 


2-5 


1/1-80 
3/T60* 


1 


1 




2 




2 




5 


10 


10 


4 


1/2-24 
7/1-85* 


— 


— 




2 




2 




5 


8 


9 


6 


1/2-80 
7/1-06 


— 


— 




1 




1 




4 


6 


6 


10 


l/3-55t 


— 


— 




1 




1 




3 


5 


5 




7/1-40 


— 


— 




1 




1 




2 


3 


4 


16 


7/1-70 


— 


— 




— 




— 




1 


2 


2 


25 


7/2-24 


— 


— 




— 




— 




1 


1 


1 


35 


7/2-50 


— 


— 




— 




— 




1 


1 


1 


50 


7/3-00t 
19/1-80 


~~ 


-~ 




~— 




_ 




1 


1 
1 


1 
I 


*For copper conductors only. 






















fFor aluminium conductors only. 























B-2.9 Passing Through Floors — Where con- 
ductors pass through floors, they shall be carried 
in an approved heavy gauge conduit properly 
bushed at both ends. The conduit shall be carried 
15 m above floor level and 2-5 cm below ceiling 
level and neatly entered into the casing, which 
shall, if so required, be suitably protected at the 
floor level. The conduit pipe shall be securely 
earthed. 

B-2.10 Casing Round Mouldings or Decora- 
tions — This shall be considered as special 
decoration work and carried out in consultation 
with the architect or the engineer-in-charge of 
construction work and with his approval. 

B-2.11 Painting and Varnishing — All casing 
and capping shall be given, before erection, inter- 
nally and on the back, two coats of varnish 
conforming to IS : 347-1975*. In addition all 
casing together with capping after erection shall be 
painted or varnished to the desired finish. 



'Specification for varnish, shellac for general purposes 

( first rtviiion ) . 



B-3. TOUGH RUBBER-SHEATHED OR PVC 
SHEATHED WIRING SYSTEM 

B-3.1 General — Wiring with tough rubber- 
sheathed cables is suitable for low voltage installa- 
tions, and shall not be used in places exposed to 
sun and rain nor in damp places, unless wires are 
sheathed in protective covering against atmosphere 
and well protected to withstand dampness. Wiring 
with PVG-sheathed cables is suitable for medium 
voltage installation and may be installed directly 
under exposed conditions of sun and rain or damp 
places. This system of wiring is suitable in situa- 
tions where acids and alkalis are likely to be 
present. Where attack from whiteants (termite) is 
prevalent, anti-termite treatment shall be given. 

All sheathed cables on brick walls, stone or 
plaster walls and ceilings, steel joists, or any 
structural steel work shall be run on well-seasoned 
and vasnished, straight teak wood battens finished 
not less than 10 mm thick and the width of which 
is such as to suit total width of cables laid on the 
batten. Prior to erection, these shall be painted 



62 



IS : 732 - 1989 



with one coat of varnish or suitable paint match- 
ing with the surroundings. These battens shall be 
secured to the walls and ceilings by flat-head wood 
screws to wood plugs or other plugs at an interval 
not exceeding 75 cm; the flat-head wood screws 
shall be countersunk within wood batten and 
smoothed down with file. 

B-3.2 Link Clips — Link clips shall conform 
to IS : 2412-1975*. Link clips shall be so arranged 
that one single clip shall not hold more than two 
twin-core TRS or PVG-sheathed cables up to 
1*5 mm* above which a single clip shall hold a 
single twin-core cable. The clips shall be fixed on 
varnished wood battens with any rust resisting pins 
or screws and spaced at intervals of 10 cm in the 
case of horizontal runs and 15 cm in the case of 
vertical runs. For the wiring and runs of mains 
exposed to heat and rain, clips specially made for 
outdoor use from a durable metal, resistant to 
weather and atmospheric corrosion, shall be used. 

B-3.3 Protection of TRS or PVC-Sheathed 
Wiring from Mechanical Damage 

B-3.3. 1 In cases where there are chances of 
any damage to the wirings, such wirings shall be 
covered with sheet metal protective covering, the 
base of which is made flush with the plaster or 
brickwork, as the case may be, or the wiring shall 
be drawn through a conduit complying with all 
requirements of conduit wiring system ( see B-5 ) . 

B-3.3.2 Such protective covering shall in all 
cases be fitted on all downdrops within 1-5 m from 
the floor. 

B-3.4 Bends in Wiring — The wiring shall not 
in any circumstances be bent so as to form a right 
angle but shall be rounded off at the corners to a 
radius not less than six times the overall diameter 
of the cable. 

B-3.5 Passing Through Floors — All cables 
taken through floors shall be enclosed in an 
insulated heavy gauge steel conduit extending 
l'5m above the floor and flush with the ceiling 
below, or by means of any other approved type of 
metallic covering. The ends of all conduits or pipes 
shall be neatly bushed with porcelain, wood or 
other approved material. 

B-3.6 Passing Through Walls — The method 
to be adopted shall be according to good practice. 
There shall be one or more conduits of adequate 
size to carry the conductors ( see Table 6 and 
Table 7 ). The conduits shall be neatly arranged 
so that the cables enter them straight without 
bending. 

B-3.7 Buried Gables — The tough rubber- 
sheathed cables shall not be buried directly in 
plaster; where so specified, they may be taken in 
teak wood channelling of ample capacity or 
cement chase or conduit buried in the wall. 



B-3.8 Stripping of Outer Covering — While 
cutting and stripping of the outer covering of the 
cables, care shall be taken that the sharp edge of 
the cutting instrument does not touch the rubber 
or PVC sheathed insulation of conductors. The 
protective outer covering of the cables shall be 
stripped off near connecting terminals, and this 
protective covering shall be maintained up to the 
close proximity of connecting terminals as far as 
practicable. Care shall be taken to avoid hammer- 
ing on link clips with any metal instruments, after 
the cables are laid. Where junction boxes are 
provided, they shall be made moisture-proof with 
an approved plastic compound. 

B-3.9 Painting — If so required, the tough 
rubber- sheathed wiring shall, after erection, be 
painted with one coat of oil-less paint or distemper 
of suitable colour over a coat of oil-less primer, 
and the PVG-sheathed wiring shall be painted 
with a synthetic enamel paint of quick drying 
type. 

B-4. METAL-SHEATHED WIRING SYSTEM 

B-4.1 General — Metal-sheathed wiring system is 
suitable for lew voltage installations, and shall not 
be used in situations where acids and alkalis are 
likely to be present. Metal-sheathed wiring may be 
used in places exposed to sun and rain provided 
no joint of any description is exposed; this system 
may be installed in damp places with approved 
protection against dampness coming in contact 
with open ends of cables. 

B-4.2 Link Clips — Link clips shall conform to 
IS : 2412-1975* and shall be so arranged that one 
single clip shall not hold more than two twin^core 
metal-sheathed cables up to 1 - 5 mm 2 , above which 
a single clip shall hold a single twin-core cable. 
The clips shall be fixed on varnished wood battens 
with brass pins or brass screws and placed at 
intervals of 10 cm in the case of horizontal runs 
and 15 cm in the case of vertical runs. For the 
wiring and runs of mains exposed to heat and rain, 
clips specially made for the outdoor use from a 
durable metal, resistant to weather and atmos- 
pheric corrosion, shall be used. 

B-4.3 Attachment to Walls and Ceilings— All 

metal- sheathed cables on brick walls, stone wails 
or plastered walls and ceilings; steel joists or any 
structural steel work shall be run on well-seasoned 
and perfectly straight teak wood battens of not less 
than 10 mm finished thickness, which have been 
well varnished on four sides. The width of teak 
wood- battens shall be such as to suit the total 
width of cables laid on the batten. Prior to erection 
these shall be painted with one coat of varnish 
( see IS : 347-1 975f ) or suitable paint of colour to 
match with the surroundings These battens shall be 
secured to the walls and ceilings by flat-head wood 



'Specification for link clips for electrical wiring (first 
revision ). 



♦Specification for link clips for electrical wiring {first 
revision ). 

fSpecification for varnish, shellac, for general ^purposes 
( first revision ) . 



63 



IS : 732 • 1989 



screws to wood plugs or other approved plugs at 
an interval not exceeding 75 cm; the flat-head 
wood screws shall be countersunk within wood 
batten and smoothed down .with file. 

B-4,4 Wiring on Rolled Steel Joists — Where 
wiring is to be carried along the face of rolled 
steel joists, a batten shall first be laid on the joists 
and clipped to it as inconspicuously as possible. 
The wiring shall be fixed to the batten in the 
ordinary way. 

B-4.5 Protection of Wiring from Mechanical 

Damage 

B-4.5. 1 In cases where there are chances of any 
damage to the wiring, such wiring shall be covered 
with sheet metal protective covering, the base of 
which is made flush with the plaster of brickwork, 
as the case may be, or the wiring shall be drawn 
through a steel conduit pipe by complying with all 
requirements of conduit system of wiring 
( seeB-5). 

B-4.5.2 The protective covering shall in all 
cases be carried right through the entire length of 
such doubtful positions. 

B-4.6 Joints — Where joint-box system is speci- 
fied, joints shall be made by means of connectors, 
insulated with porcelain, or other approved mate- 
rial and enclosed in joint-boxes. The joint-boxes 
shall be so constructed as to prevent insects from 
entering them, and to allow the white washing of 
the walls without water having access to the 
connectors. All cables shall be bonded through, 
or across these boxes. Bonding connections shall 
be so arranged as not to come in contact with 
plaster. 

B-4.7 Stripping of Insulation and Outer 
Covering 

B-4.7.1 When rubber or PVG insulation has to 
be stripped for joints, the metal sheathing shall be 
nicked only, not cut, and the insulation between 
the metal sheath and the conductors shall be of 
rubber or PVG sheath only. All tape shall be 
stripped off. Where paper-insulated metal-sheathed 
cable is used, all openings in the same shall be 
efficiently sealed. 

B-4.7.2 While cutting and stripping of the outer 
covering of the cables, care shall be taken that the 
sharp edge of cutting instrument does not touch 
the rubber or PVG insulation of conductors. While 
connecting conductors to the connecting terminals 
of accessories, care shall be taken to remove cotton 
tape covering from the top of rubber insulation of 
cable. The cotton tape covering shall always 
remain inside lead covering of cables. 

B-4 .8 Passing Through Floors — All cables 

taken through floors shall be enclosed in an 

insulated steel conduit extending 1 "5 m above the 

~floor and flush with the ceiling below, or protected 



by means of any other approved type of metallic 
covering. The ends of all conduits or pipes shall be 
neatly bushed with porcelain, wood or other 
approved material. 

B-4.9 Passing Through Walls — The method 
to be adopted shall be in accordance with good 
practice. There shall be one or more conduits of 
adequate size to carry the conductors ( see Tables 6 
and 7 ). The conduit (s) shall be neatly arranged so 
that the cables enter them straight without bend- 
ing. 

B-4. 10 Burried Gables — Metal sheathed cables 
shall in no case be burried directly in the plaster 
or under any masonry work. 

B-4. 11 Earthing — Precautions shall be taken to 
ensure that all lead sheathing including portable 
appliance with exposed metal parts, together with 
all joint-boxes and other similar receptacles are 
efficiently earthed and made electrically continu- 
ous throughout their lengths by means of soldered 
joints or approved suitable clamps or, alternatively 
with earth continuity conductors ( each bonded 
cables ) specially manufactured for the purpose. 
The earthing shall extend to all main switches, 
distribution boards, etc, in compliance with Indian 
Electricity Rules, 1 956, as well as manufacturers' 
design and instructions in connection with earth- 
ing of all insulated microgap main switches or 
similar fittings. 

B-4.12 Resistance — The electrical resistance of 
the metal sheathing together with the resistance of 
the earthing lead, measured from the connection 
with the earth electrode to any other position in 
the completed installation shall not exceed one 
ohm. 

B-4. 13 Painting — Where required, all metal- 
sheathed wiring or its protective covering when 
such is fitted, shall be neatly painted after erection 
with two coats of any suitable paint. 

B-5. CONDUIT WIRING SYSTEM 

B-5.I Surface Conduit Wiring System with 
Rigid Steel Conduits 

B -5.1.1 Type and Size of Conduit — All conduit 
pipes shall be conforming to IS : 1653-1972*, 
finished with galvanized or stove enamelled 
surface. All conduit accessories shall be of threaded 
type and under no circumstances pin grip type or 
clamp type accessories be used. No steel conduit 
less than 16 mm in diameter shall be used. The 
number of insulated conductors that can be drawn 
into rigid steel conduit are given in Table 6. 

B-5.1.2 Bunching of Cables — Unless otherwise 
specified, insulated conductors of ac supply and dc 
supply shall be bunched in separate conduits. For 
lighting and small power outlet circuits phase 
segregation in separate conduits is recommended. 

•Specification for rigid steel conduits for electrical 
wiring ( second revision ) . 



64 



























IS : 732 • 1989 


TABLE 6 


MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE NUMBER OF 250 V GRADE SINGLE-CORE CABLES 
THAT CAN BE DRAWN INTO RIGID STEEL CONDUITS 

( Clauses B-3.7, B-4.9 and B-5.1.1 ) 


SlZB < 


or Cable 










Size 


OF ' 


Condui- 1 , mm 






Nominal 

Cross- 
Sectional 
Area, 
mm 8 
1-0 
1-5 


■'■■* i 

Number 

and 
Diameter 
of Wires, 

mm 
1/1-12* 
1/1-40 


r— ■ 

16 

_.-v 

S 

5 

4 


■ — > 
B 

4 
3 


20 

S 

7 
7 


— < 
B 

5 

5 


25 32 
Number of Cables, 

S B S B 

13 10 20 14 

12 10 20 14 


40 
Max 

( A-. 

s 


— » 
B 


50 63 

t — *—— • > (— "* » 

S B S B 


2-5 


f 1/1-80 \ 
1 3/1-06* j 


3 


2 





5 


10 


8 


18 


12 








4 
6 


f j/2-24 1. 
1 7/0-85* | 

f 1/2-80 \ 
| 7/1-06* j 


3 
2 


2 


4 
3 


3 
2 


7 
6 


8 
5 


12 
10 


10 
8 








10 


f ll/3"55t"l 
1 7/1-40* J 


— 


— 


2 
2 


— 


5 
4 


4 
3 


8 
6 


7 
5 


8 


6 


_____ 


16 
25 
35 


7/1-70 

7/2-24 
7/2-50 


— ■— * 


"~ ~ 






2 




4 
3 
2 


3 

2 


7 
5 

4 


6 
4 
3 


8 6 9 7 
7 5 8 6 


50 


J 7/3-00t \ 


















2 


— 


5 4 6 5 



J 

Note 1 — The table shows the maximum capacity of conduits for the simultaneouly drawing 
of cables. The columns headed S apply to runs of conduit which have distance not exceeding 
4'25 m between drawn-in boxes, and which do not deflect from the straight by an angle of more 
than 15°. The columns headed B apply to runs of conduit which deflect from the straight by an 
angle of more than 15°. 

Note 2 — In case an inspection type draw-in box has been provided and if the cable in first 
drawn through one straight conduit, then through the draw-in box, and then through the second 
straight conduit, such systems may be considered as that ol a straight conduit even if the conduit 
deflects through the straight by more than 15°. 

•For copper conductors only. 
fFor aluminium conductors only. 



B-5.1.3 Conduit Joints — Conduit pipes shall be 
joined by means of screwed couplers and screwed 
accessories only ( see IS : 2667-1976* ). In long 
distances straight runs of conduit, inspection type 
couplers at reasonable intervals shall be provided 
or running threads with couplers and jam-nuts ( in 
the latter case the bare threaded portion shall be 
treated with anti-corrosive preservative ) shall be 
provided. Threaded on conduit pipes in all cases 
shall be between 1 1 mm to 27 mm long sufficient 
to accommodate pipes to full threaded portion of 
couplers or accessories. Gut ends of conduit pipes 
shall have no sharp edges nor any burrs left to 
avoid damage to the insulation of conductors while 
pulling them through such pipes. 

B-5.1.4 Protection Against Dampness — In order 
to minimize condensation or sweating inside the 



•Specification for fittings for rigid steel conduits for elec- 
trical wiring ( first revision ) 



tube, all outlets of conduit system shall be properly 
drained and ventilated, but in such a manner as 
to prevent the entry of insects as far as possible. 

B-5.1.5 Protection of Conduit Against Rust — The 
outer surface of the conduit pipes, including all 
bends, unions, tees, junction boxes, etc, forming 
part of the conduit system shall be adequately 
protected against rust particularly when such 
system is exposed to weather. In all cases, no bare 
threaded portion of conduit pipe shall be allowed 
unless such bare threaded portion is treated with 
anti-corrosive preservative or covered with suitable 
plastic compound. 

B-5.1.6 Fixing of Conduit — Conduit pipes shall 
be fixed by heavy gauge saddles, secured to suit- 
able wood plugs or other plugs with screws in an 
approved manner at an interval of not more than 
one metre, but on either side of couplers or bends 
or similar fittings, saddles shall be fixed at a 
distance of 30 cm from the centre of such fittings. 



65 



IS t 732 - 1989 



B-5.1.7 Bends in Conduit — All necessary bends 
in the system including diversion shall be done by 
bending pipes; or by inserting suitable solid or 
inspection type normal bends, elbows or similar 
fittings; or fixing cast-iron inspection boxes which> 
ever is more suitable. Conduit fittings shall be 
avoided as far as possible on conduit system 
exposed to weather; where necessary, solid type 
fittings shall be used. Radius of such bends in 
conduit pipes shall not be less than 7*5 cm. No 
length of conduit shall have more than the equiva- 
lent of four quarter bends from outlet to outlet, the 
bends at the outlets not being counted. 

B-5.1.8 Outlets — All outlets for fittings, switches, 
etc, shall be boxes of suitable metal or any other 
approved outlet boxes for either surface mounting 
or flush mounting system. 

B-5.1.9 Conductors — All conductors used in 
conduit wiring shall preferably be stranded. No 
single-core cable of nominal cross-sectional area 
greater than 130 mm* enclosed alone in a conduit 
and used for alternating current. 

B-5.1.10 Erection and Earthing of Conduit — The 
conduit of each circuit or section shall be comple- 
ted before conductors are drawn in. The entire 
system of conduit after erection shall be tested for 
mechanical and electrical continuity throughout 
and permanently connected to earth conforming 
to the requirements specified in this standard by 
means of suitable earthing clamp efficiently faste- 
ned to conduit pipe in a workmanlike manner for 
a perfect continuity between each wire and con- 
duit. GasHor water pipes shall not be used as earth 
medium. If conduit pipes are liable to mechanical 
damage they shall be adequately protected. 

B-5.1.11 Inspection type conduit fittings such 
as inspection boxes, draw boxes, bends, elbows and 
tees shall be so installed that they can remain 
accessible for such purposes as withdrawal of exist- 
ing cables or the installing of additional cables. 

B-5.2 Recessed Conduit Wiring System with 
Rigid Steel Conduits — Recessed conduit wiring 
system shall comply with all the requirements for 
surface conduit wiring system specified in B-5.1.1 
to B-5.1.9 and in addition, conform to the require- 
ments specified below. 

B-5.2. 1 Making of Chase — The chase in the 
wall shall be neatly made and be of ample dimen- 
sions to permit the conduit to be fixed in the 
manner desired. In the case of buildings under 
construction, chases shall be provided in wall, 
ceiling, etc, at the time of their construction and 
shall be filled up neatly after erection of conduit 
and brought to the original finish of the wall. 

B-5.2.2 Fixing of Conduit in Chase — The con- 
duit pipe shall be fixed by means of staples or by 
means of saddles not more than 60 cm apart. 
Fixing of standard bends or elbows shall be avoid- 
ed as far as practicable and all curves maintained 



by bending the conduit pipe itself with a long 
radius which will permit easy drawing-in of con- 
ductors. All threaded joints of rigid steel conduit 
shall be treated with preservative compound to 
secure protection against rust. 

B-5.2.3 Inspection Boxes — Suitable inspection 
boxes shall be provided to permit periodical 
inspection and to facilitate removal of wires, if 
necessary. These shall be mounted flush with the 
wall. Suitable ventilating holes shall be provided 
in the inspection box covers. The minimum sizes 
of inspection boxes shall be 75 mm x 75 mm. 

B-5.2.4 Types of Accessories to be Used — All 
outlet, such as switches and wall sockets, may be 
either of flush mounting type or of surface mount- 
ing type. 

B-5.2.4. 1 Flush mounting type — All flush 
mounting outlets shall be of cast iron or mild steel 
boxes with a cover of insulating material or shall 
be a box made of a suitable insulating material. 
The switches and other outlets shall be mounted 
on such boxes. The metal box shall be efficiently 
earthed with conduit by a suitable means of earth 
attachment. 

B-5.2.4.2 Surface mounting type — If surface 
mounting type outlet box is specified, it shall be of 
any suitable insulating jfiaterial and outlets 
mounted in an approved manner. 

B-5.2.5 When crossing through expansion joints 
in buildings, the conduit sections across the joint 
may be through flexible conduits of the same size, 
as the rigid conduit. 

B-5.3 Conduit Wiring System with Rigid 
Non-metallic Conduits — Rigid non-metallic 
conduits are used for surface, recessed and con- 
cealed conduit wiring. 

B-5.3. 1 Type and Size — All non-metallic 
conduits used shall conform to IS : 9537 ( Part 3 )- 
1987*. The conduit may be either threaded type 
or plain type as specified in IS : 9537 ( Part 3 )- 
1987* and shall be used with the corresponding 
accessories ( see IS : 34l9-1976f ). 

B-5.3.2 Bunching of Cables — Conductors of ac 
supply and dc supply shall be bunched in separate 
conduits. For lighting and small power outlet 
circuits phase segregation in separate circuits is 
recommended. The number of insulated cables 
that may be drawn into the conduits are given in 
Table 7. In this table the space factor does not 
exceed 40 percent. 



•Specification for conduits for electrical installations: 
Part 3 Rigid plain conduits of insulating materials. 

tSpecification for fittings for rigid non-metallic conduits 
{first revision ). 



66 



IS t 732 - 1989 



TABLE 7 MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE NUMBER OF 250 VOLTS GRADE SINGLE-CORE 
CABLES THAT MAY BE DRAWN INTO RIGID NON-METALLIC CONDUITS 

( Clausts B-3.7, B-4.9 and B-5.3.2 ) 



Size 


of Cable 


Nominal 


I... ■■ i, 
Number and 


Cross- 


Diameter (in 


Sectional 


mm) of 


Area 


Wires 


mm' 




1-0 


1/1-12* 


1'5 


1/T40 


2'5 


( 1/1-80 ) 




( 3/T06* ) 


4 


( 1/2-24 ) 




( 7/0-85* ) 


6 


( 1/2-80 ) 




( 7/1-40* ) 


10 


( l/3-55t ) 




( 7/1-40* ) 


16 


7/1-70 


25 


7/2-24 


35 


7/2-50 


50 


7/3-00t 




19/1-80 


•For copper conductors only. 


tFor aluminium conductors only, 



Size ot Conduit ( mm ) 



16 20 25 32 40 

Number of Cables, Max 



50 



5 


7 


13 


20 


•- 


— 


4 


6 


10 


14 


— 


— 


3 


5 


10 


14 


— 


— 


2 


3 


6 


10 


14 


— 


— 


2 


5 


9 


11 


— 


— 


— 


4 


7 ' 


9 


— 


— 


_ 


2 


4 


5 


12 


— 


— 


— 


2 


2 


6 


— 


— 


— 


— 


2 


5 

5 
3 


_ 


_ 


— 





2 
2 



B-5.3.3 Conduit Joints — Conduits shall be join- 
ed by means of screwed or plain couplers depend- 
ing on whether the conduits are screwed or plain. 
Where there are long runs of straight conduit, 
inspection type couplers shall be provided at 
intervals. For conduit fittings and accessories 
reference may be made to IS : 3419-1976*. 

B-5.3,4 Fixing of Conduits — The provisions 
of B-5.1.6 shall apply except that the spiling be- 
tween saddles or supports is recommended to be 
60 cm for rigid non-metallic conduits. 

B-5.3.5 Bends in Conduits — Wherever necessary, 
bends or diversions may be achieved by bending 
the conduits (see B-5.3.9 ) or by employing normal 
bends, inspection bends, inspection boxes, elbows 
or similar fittings. 

B-5.3.6 Conduit fittings shall be avoided, as far 
as possible, on outdoor systems. 

B-5.3.7 Outlets — In order to minimize conden- 
sation or sweating inside the conduit, all outlets of 
conduit system shall be properly drained and 
ventilated, but in such a manner as to prevent the 
entry of insects. 

B-5.3.8 For use with recessed conduit wiring 
system the provisions of B-5.2.1 to B-5.2.4 shall 

apply. 

•Specification for fittings for rigid non-metallic conduits 

( first revision ) . 



B-5.3.9 Heat may be used to soften the conduit 
for bending and forming joints in case of plain 
conduits. As the material softens when heated, 
sitting of conduit in close proximity to hot surfaces 
should be avoided. Caution should be exercised in 
the use of this conduit in locations where the 
ambient temperature is 50 'Cor above. Use ofauch 
conduits in places where ambient temperature is 
60°C or above is prohibited. 

B-5.3.10 Non-metallic conduit systems shall be 
used only where it is ensured that they are: 

a) suitable for the extremes of ambient tem- 
perature to which they are likely to be 
subjected in service, 

b) resistant to moisture and chemical atmos- 
pheres, and 

c) resistant to low temperature and sunlight 
effects. 

For use underground, the material shall be 
resistant to moisture and corrosive agents. 

Now — Rigid PVC conduits are not suitable for 
use where the normal working temperature of the con- 
duits and fittings may exceed 55°C. Certain types of 
rigid PVC conduits and their associated fittings are un- 
suitable for use where the ambient temperature is likely 
to fall below -5°C. 



67 



IS: 732 -1989 



APPENDIX C 

( Clauses 11.7 and 12.3 ) 

GUIDELINES FOR SPECIFIC EQUIPMENT FITTINGS AND ACCESSORIES 



C-0. GENERAL 

C-0.1 AH equipment, fittings and accessories, 
materials, etc, selected for the. wiring installation 
shall conform to the relevant Indian Standards 
wherever these exist. 



C-l. CEILING ROSES 
ATTACHMENTS 



AND SIMILAR 



C-l.l A ceiling rose or any other similar attach- 
ment shall not be used on a circuit, the voltage of 
which normally exceeds 250 V. 

C-1.2 Normally, only one flexible cord shall be 
attached to a ceiling rose. Specially designed ceil- 
ing roses shall be used for multiple pendants. 

C-l .3 A ceiling rose shall not embody fuse ter- 
minal as an integral part of it. 

C-2. SOCKET-OUTLETS AND PLUGS 

C-2.1 Each 15 A socket-outlet provided in buil- 
dings for the use of domestic appliances such as 
air-conditioner, water cooler etc, shall be provi- 
ded with its own individual fuse, with suitable 
discrimination with back-up fuse or miniature 
circuit-breaker provided in the distribution/sub- 
distribution board. The socket-outlet shall not 
necessarily embody the fuse as an integral part 
of it. 

C-2. 2 Each socket-oulet shall also be controlled 
by a switch which shall preferably be located 
immediately adjacent thereto or combined there- 
with. 

C-2.3 The switch controlling the socket-outlet 
shall be on the live side of the line. 

C-2.4 Ordinary socket-outlet may be fixed at any 
convenient place at a height ajbove 20 cm from 
the floor level and shall be away from danger of 
mechanical injury. 

Noth — In situations where a socket-outlet is 
accessible to children, it is necessary to install an in- 
terlocked plug and socket or alternatively a socket- 
outlet which automatically gets screened by the with- 
drawal of plug. In industrial premises socket-outlet of 
rating 20A and above shall preferably be provided 
with interlocked type switch. 

C-2. 5 In an earthed system of supply, a socket- 
outlet with plug shall be of three-pin type with 
the third terminal connected to the earth. When 
such socket-outlets with plugs are connected to 
any current consuming device of metal or any 
non-insulating material or both, conductors 
connecting such current-consuming devices shall 
be of flexible cord with an earthing core and the 
earthing core shall be secured by connecting 



between the earth terminal of plug and the body 
of current-consuming devices. 

In industrial premises three phase and neutral 
socket-outlets shall be provided with a earth 
terminal either of pin type or scrapping type in 
addition to the main pins required for the 
purpose. 

C-2.6 Inwirirg installations, metal clad switch, 
socket-outlet and plugs shall be used for power 
wiring. 

C-3. LIGHTING FITTINGS 

C-3.1 A switch shall be provided for control of 
every lighting fitting or a group of lighting 
fittings. Where control at more than one point is 
necessary as many two way or intermediate swit- 
ches may be provided as there are control points. 

C-3.2 In industrial premises lighting fittings shall 
be supported by suitable pipe/conduits, brackets 
fabricated from structural steel, steel chains or 
similar materials depending upon the type and 
weight of the fittings. Where a lighting fitting is 
supported by one or more flexible cords, the 
maximum weight to which the twin flexible cords 
may be subjected shall be as follows: 



Nominal Cross- 
Sectional Area of 
Twin Flexible 
Cord 
mm 1 
0-5 
0-75 
1-0 
1-5 
2-5 
4 



Number and 
Diameter in 
mm of Wires 



16/02 
24/0-2 
32/0-2 
48/0-2 
80/0-2 
128/0-2 



Maximum 

Permissible 

Weight 

kg 

2 

3 

5 

5-3 

8-8 

14-0 



C-3.3 No flammable shade shall form a part of 
lighting fittings unless such shade is well protected 
against all risks of fire. Celluloid shade or lighting 
fitting shall not be used under any circumstances. 

C-4. FITTING-WIRE 

C-4.1 The use of fittings-wire shall be restricted 
to the internal wiring of the lighting fittings. 
Where fittings-wire is used for wiring fittings, the 
sub-circuit loads shall terminate in a ceiling rose 
or box with connectors from which they shall be 
carried into the fittings. 



68 



IS t 732- 1989 



C-5. LAMPHOLDERS 

C-5.1 Lampholders for use on brackets and the 
like shall be in accordance with IS : 1258-1979* 
and all those for use with flexible pendants shall 
be provided with cord grips. All lampholders 
shall be provided with shade carriers. Where 
centre-contact Edison screw lampholders are used, 
the outer or screw contacts shall be connected to 
the 'middle wire', the neutral, the earthed 
conductor of the circuit. 

C6. OUTDOOR LAMPS 

C-6.1 External and road lamps shall have wea- 
ther-proof fittings of approved design so as to 
•effectively prevent the ingress of moisture and 
dust. Flexible cord and cord grip lampholders 
shall not be used where exposed to weather. In 
verandahs and similar exposed situations where 
pendants are used, these shall be of fixed rod 
type. 

C-7. LAMPS 

C-7.1 All lamps unless otherwise required and 
suitably protected, shall be hung at a height of 
not less than 25 m above the floor level. They 
shall be in accordance with the relevant Indian 
Standard. 

C-7.1. 1 Portable lamps shall be wired with 
flexible cord. Hand lamps shall be equipped with 
a handle of moulded composition or other 
material approved for the purpose. Hand lamps 
shall be equipped with a substantial guard atta- 
ched to the lampholder or handle. Metallic guards 
shall be earthed suitably. 

C-7.1.2 A bushing or the equivalent shall be 
provided where flexible cord enters the base or 
stem of portable lamp. The bushing shall be of 
insulating material unless a jacketted type of cord 
is used. 

C-7.1.3 All wiring shall be free from short 
circuits and shall be tested for these defects prior 
to being connected to the circuit. 

C-7.1. 4 Exposed live parts within porcelain 
fixtures shall be suitably recessed and so located 
as to make it improbable that wires will come in 
contact with them. There shall be a spacing of at 
least 125 mm between live parts and the mount- 
ing plane of the fixture. 

C-8. FANS, REGULATORS AND CLAMPS 

C-8.1 Ceiling Fans — Ceiling fans including 
their suspension shall conform to IS : 374-1979f 
and to the following requirements: 

a) Control of a ceiling fan shall be through 
its own regulator as well as a switch in 
series. 



'Specification for bayonet lampholders ( second revision ) . 
fSpecification for electric ceiling type fans and regula- 
tors {third revision ). 



b) All ceiling fans shall be wired with normal 
wiring to ceiling roses or to special connec- 
tor boxes to which fan rod wires shall be 
connected and suspended from hooks or 
shackles with insulators between hooks and 
suspension rods. There shall be no joint in 
the suspension rod, but if joints are un- 
avoidable then such joints shall be screwed 
to special couplers of 5 cm minimum length 
and both ends of the pipes shall touch 
together within the couplers, and shall in 
addition be secured by means of split pins; 
alternatively, the two pipes may be 
welded. The suspension rod shall be of 
adequate strength to withstand the dead 
and impact forces imposed on it. Suspen- 
sion rods should preferably be procured 
along with the fan. 

c) Fan clamps shall be of suitable design 
according to the nature of construction of 
ceiling on which these clamps are to be 
fitted. In all cases fan clamps shall be 
fabricated from new metal of suitable sizes 
and they shall be as close fitting as possible. 
Fan clamps for reinforced concrete roofs 
shall be buried with the casting and due 
care shall be taken that they shall serve 
the purpose. Fan clamps for wooden 
beams, shall be of suitable flat iron fixed on 
two sides of the beam and according to the 
size and section of the beam one or two 
mild steel bolts passing through the beam 
shall hold both flat irons together. Fan 
clamps for steel joist shall be fabricated 
from flat iron to fit rigidly to the bottom 
flange of the beam. Care shall be taken 
during fabrication that the metal does not 
crack while hammering to shape. Other 
fan clamps shall be made to suit the posi- 
tion, but in all cases care shall be taken to 
see that they are rigid and safe. 

Not* — All fan clamps shall be so fabricated that 
fans revolve steadily. 

d) Canopies on top and bottom of suspension 
rods shall effectively conceal suspensions 
and connections to fan motors, respect^ 
vely. 

e) The lead-in-wire shall be of nominal cross- 
sectional area not less than TO mm* copper 
or 1*5 mm* aluminium and shall be protec- 
ted from abrasion. 

f) Unless otherwise specified, the clearance 
between the bottom-most point of the 
ceiling fan and the floor shall be not less 
than 2-4 m. The minimum clearance be- 
tween the ceiling and the plane of the 
blades shall be not less than 300 mm. 

C-8.2 Exhaust Fans — For fixing of an exhaust 
fan, a circular hole shall be provided in the wall 
to suit the size of the frame which shall be fixed 
by means of rag-bolts embedded in the wall. The 



69 



IS i 732 -1989 



hole shall be neatly plastered with cement and 
brought to the original finish of the wall. The 
fxhaust fan shall be connected to exhaust fan 
point which shall be wired as near to the hole as 
possible by means of a flexible cord, care being 
taken that the blades rotate in the proper direc- 
tion, 

C-9. ATTACHMENT OF FITTINGS AND 
ACCESSORIES 

C-9.1 In wiring other than conduit wiring, all 
ceiling roses, brackets, pendants and accessories 
attached to walls or ceilings shall be mounted on 
substantial teak wood blocks twice varnished after 
all fixing holes are made in them. Blocks shall 
not be less than 4 cm deep. Brass screws shall 
only be used for attaching fittings and accessories 
to their base blocks. 

C-9.2 Where teak or hardwood boards are used 
for mounting switches, regulators, etc, these 
boards shall be well varnished with pure shellac 
on all four sides ( both inside and outside ), irres- 
pective of being painted to match the surroundings. 



The size of such boards shall depend on the 
number of accessories that could conveniently 
and neady be arranged. Where there is danger of 
attack by termite, the boards shall be treated with 
suitable anti-termite compound and painted on 
both sides. 

C-10. INTERCHANGEAB1LITY 

C-10.1 Similar part of all switches, lampholders, 
distribution fuse-boards, ceiling roses, brackets, 
pendants, fans and all other fittings shall be so 
chosen that they are of the same type and inter- 
changeable in each installation. 

C-ll. EQUIPMENT 

C-ll.l Electrical equipment which form integral 
part of wiring intended for switching or control 
or protection of wiring installations shall conform 
to the relevant Indian Standards wherever they 
exist. Guidelines on their selection, installation 
and maintenance are given in separate Indian 
Standard codes of practice. 



APPENDIX D 

( Clause 11.7 ) 

SPECIFIC GUIDANCE ON SELECTION OF EQUIPMENT WITH REGARD TO 

EXTERNAL INFLUENCES 



D-l. EXTERNAL INFLUENCE 

D-l.l Electrical equipment shall be selected and 
erected in accordance with the requirements of 
Table 8, which indicates die characteristics of 
equipment necessary according to the external 
influences to which the equipment may be subjec- 
ted, as such influences are defined in 4. 

Equipment characteristics shall be determined 
either by a degree of protection or by conformity 
to tests. 

D-1.2 If the equipment does not, by its constitu- 
tion, have the characteristics relevant to the exter- 
nal influences of its location, it may nevertheless 
be used on condition that it is provided with 
appropriate additional protection in the erection 
of the installation. Such protection shall not 
adversely afreet the operation 6f the equipment 
thus protected. 

D-l. 3 When different external iufluences occur 
simultaneously, they may have independent or 
mutual effect and the degree of protection shall be 
provided accordingly. 



D-1.4 The selection of equipment according to 
external influences is necessary not only for proper 
functioning, but also to ensure the reliability of 
the measures of protection for safety complying 
with this Standard. Measures of protection afford- 
ed by the construction of equipment valid only for 
the given conditions of external influence if the 
corresponding equipment specification, tests are 
made in these conditions of external influence. 

Nora 1 — For the purposes of this standard, the 
following classes of external influence are convention- 
ally regarded as normal: 

A A Ambient temperature 
AB Atmosphere humidity 



AA4 

Under consideration 
( but, for example, 
50 percent relative 
humidity at 40 o C )„ 

XXI for each para- 
meter 

XX 1 for each para- 
meter 

XX2 for the para- 
meter BC 

Note 2 — The word 'normal* appearing in the 
third column of the table signifies that the equipment 
must generally satisfy applicable Indian Standards. 



Other environmental conditions 
( AG to AR ) 

Utilization and construction of 
buildings ( B and C ) 



70 



IS : 732 - 1989 



Code 



AD 

AD1 

AD2 

ADS 

AD4 

AD5 

AD6 

AD7 

AD8 

AE 

AE1 

AE2 

AE3 

AE4 

AF 

AF1 

AF2 

AF3 

AF4 

AG 

AG1 

AG2 

•May 
f Basic 



TABLE 8 ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT 

{Clause D-l.l ) 



EXTERNAL INFLUENCE 



(1) 


(2) 


A 


Environmental conditions 


AA 

AA1 
AA2 
AA3 


Ambient temperature 

- 60°C to + 5"C 

- 40°C to + 5°C 

- 25°C to + 5*C 


AA4 


- 5°C to + 40°C 


AA5 


+ 5°G to + 40°C 


AA6 


+ 5°C to + 60°C 


AB 


Atmospheric humidity 


AC 


Altitude 


AC1 


< 2 000 m 


AC2 


> 2 000 m 



Presence of water 

Negligible 

Free-falling drops 

Sprays 

Splashes 

Jets 

Waves 

Immersion 

Submersion 
Presence of foreign solid bodies 

Negligible 

Small objects ( 2*5 mm ) 

Very small objects ( 1 mm ) 

Dust 

Pressure of corrosive or polluting substances 

Negligible 
Atmospheric 

Intermittent or accidental 

Continuous 

Mechanical stresses 
Impact 

Low severity 
Medium severity 



r 
< 



Characteristics Required tor 

Selection and Erection of 

Equipment 

(3) 



Specially designed equipment or appropriate 

arrangements* 

Normal ( in certain cases special precautions 
may be necessary ) 

Normal 

Specially designed equipment or appropriate 
arrangements* 

Under consideration 



Normal 

May necessitate special precautions such as the 
application of derating factors 

Note — For some equipment special 
arrangements may be necessary at altitude of 
1 000 m and above. 

IP X0 
IP XI 
IP X3 
IP X4 
IP X5 
IP X6 
IP X7 
IP X8 

IP OX 
IP 3X 
IP 4X 

IP 5X if dust penetration is not harmful to func- 
tioning of equipment 
IP 6X if dust should not penetrate equipment 

Normal 

According to the nature of substances ( for exam- 
ple, satisfaction of salt mist test according to 
IS :9000 (Part 11 )-1983t. 

Protection against corrosion according to equip- 
ment specification 

Equipment specially designed according to the 
nature of substances 



Normal, for example, household and similar 
equipment 

Standard industrial equipment, where applica- 
ble, or reinforced protection 



necessitate certain supplementary precautions ( for example, special lubrication ). 
environmental testing procedures for electronic and electrical items: Part 11 Salt mist test. 



( Continued ) 



71 



IS : 732 - 1989 



TABLE 8 ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT — Conld. 



Code 

(1) 
AG3 
AH 
AH1 
AH2 

AH3 

AJ 

AK 

AKl 
AK2 



External Influence 



(2) 



High severity 
Vibration 

Low severity 
Medium severity 

High severity 

Other mechanical stresses 

Presence of flora and moulds growth or 
moulds growth 

No hazard 

Hazard 



AL 


Pressure of fauna 


AL1 


No hazard 


AL2 


Hazard 



AM Electromagnetic, electrostatic, or ionizing 

influences 
AMI Negligible 

AM2 Stray currents 



AM3 


Electromagnetics 


AM4 


Ionization 


AM5 


Electrostatics 


AM6 


Induction 



AN 


Solar radiation 


AN1. 


Negligible 


AN2 


Significant 



Characteristics Required for 

Selection and Erection op 

Equipment 

(3) 

Reinfored protection 



Normal 

Specially designed 
arrangements 

Under consideration 



equipment, or special 



Normal 

Special protection, such as: 

a) Increased degree of protection ( see AE ) , 

b) Special materials or protective coating of 
enclosures, and 

c) Arrangements to exclude flora from loca- 
tion. 

Normal 

Protection may include: 

a) An appropriate degree of protection 
against penetration of foreign solid bodies 

( see AE ), 

b) Sufficient mechanical resistance ( set AG ), 

c) Precautions to exclude fauna from the 
location ( such as cleanliness and use of 
pesticides ), and 

d) Special equipment or protective coating of 
enclosures. 



Normal 

Special protection, such as: 

a) Appropriate insulation, 

b) Special protective coatings, 

c) Cathodic protection, and 

d) Supplementary equipotential bonding. 
Special protection such as : 

a) Spacings from radiation sources, 

b) Interposition of screens, and 

c) Enclosure by special materials. 
Special protection, such as: 

a") Appropriate insulation of the location, and 
b) Supplementary equipotential boncfing. 
Special protection, such as: 

a) Spacing from sources of induction current, 
and 

b) Interposition of screens. 

Normal 

Special arrangements, such as: 

a) Materials resistant to ultraviolet radiation, 

b) Special colour coatings, and 

c) Interposition of screens. 

( Continued ) 



72 



IS j 732. 1989 



TABLE 8 ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT — Contd 



Code 



(1) 
AP 
API 

AP2 
AP3 

AP4 

Ad 
AQ1 
AQ2 

AQ3 
AR 
B 
BA 

BA1 
BA2 



BA3 
BA4 

BA5 

BB 

BG 



BC1 
BC2 
BC3 
BC4 



External Influence 



Chabactebistics Required for 
Selection and Erection of 
Equipment 



BD 

BD1 

BD2 

BD3 

BD4 

BE 

BE1 

BE2 



BE3 



BE4 



(2) 
Seismic effects 
Negligible 

Low severity 
Medium severity 
High severity 

Lighting 

Negligible 

Indirect exposure 

Direct exposure 
Wind 

Utilization 
Capacity of persons 

Ordinary 

Children 



Handicapped 
Instructed 

Skilled 
Electrical resistance of the human body 
Contact of persons with earth potential 



None 
Low 

Frequent 
Continuous 



(3) 



/ 



"1 

Y 

J 



Normal 

Under consideration 

Normal 

Under consideration 

Under consideration 



Normal 

Equipment of degrees of protection higher than 
IP 2X. Inaccessability of equipment with 
external surface temperature exceeding 80°C 
( 60'C for nurseries and the like ) 

According to the nature of the handicap 

Equipment not protected against direct contact 
admitted solely in locations which are access- 
able only to duly authorized persons 

Under consideration 
Class of equipment according to IS : 9409-1980* 



0-01 
A 
A 
X 



I 
Y 
A 
A 



II 
A 
A 
A 



III 
A 
A 
A 



Under consideration 
A = Equipment permitted 
X = Equipment prohibited 
Y — Permitted if used as Class 

Normal 

Equipment made of material retarding the 
spread of flame and evolution of smoke and 
toxic gases. Detailed requiiements are under 
consideration. 

Normal 

Equipment made of material retarding the 
spread of flame. Arrangements such that a 
significant temperature rise or a spark within 
electrical equipment cannot initiate an exter- 
nal fire 

According to the requirements of relevant 
Indian Standard on electrical apparatus for 
explosive atmospheres 

Appropriate arrangements such as: 

a) Protection against falling debris from 
broken lamps and other fragile objects, 
and 

b) Screens against harmful radiation such as 
infrared or ultra-violet. 

•Classification of electrical and electronic equipment with regard to protection against electric shock. 

( Continued ) 



Conditions of evacuation in an emergency 
Low density/easy exit 
Low density/difficult exit 
High density/easy exit 
High density/ difficult exit 

Nature of processed or stored materials 
No significant risks 
Fire risks 



Explosion risks 



Contamination risks 



73 



IS t 732 - 1989 



Code 



GB3 
CB4 



TABLE 8 ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT— Contd 



External Inpiuenob 



(1) 


(2) 


c 


ConstruttioH of Buildings 


CA 


Construction materials 


CA1 


Non-combustible 


CA2 


Combustible 


CB 


Building design 


CB1 


Negligible risks 


CB2 


Propagation of fire 



Movement 
Flexible or unstable 



Characteristics Required for 
Selection - and Erection or 

Equipment 

(3) 



Normal 

Under consideration 

Normal 

Equipment made of material retarding the 
propagation of fire including fires not . origi- 
nating from the electrical installation. Fire 
barriers 

Note — Fire detectors may be provided. 

Contraction or expansion joints in electrical 
wiring. 

Under consideration 



APPENDIX 

( Item 12.2.1 ) 



E 



CHECK LIST OF INITIAL INSPECTION 



E-0. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

E-0.1 Before the completed installation, or an 
addition to the existing installation, is put into 
service, inspection and testing shall be carried out 
in accordance with the Indian Electricity Rules, 
1956. In the event of defects being found, these 
shall be rectified, as soon as practicable and the 
installation retested. 

E-0.2 Periodic inspection and testing shall be 
carried out in order to maintain the installation 
in a sound condition after putting into service. 

E-0.3 Where an addition is to be made to the 
fixed wiring of an existing installation, the latter 
shall be examined for compliance with the recom- 
mendations of this code. 

E-0.4 The individual equipment and materials 
which form part of the installation shall generally 
conform to the relevant Indian Standard Speci- 
fication wherever applicable. If there is no rele- 
vant Indian Standard Specification for^any item, 
these shall be approved by the appropriate 
authority. 



E-I.O General — On completion of wiring a 
general inspection shall be carried out by com- 
petent personnel in order to verify that the pro- 
visions of this code and that of Indian Electricity 
Rules, 1956 have been complied with. This, 
among other things, shall include checking whe- 
ther all equipment*, fittings, accesso ri es, wires/ 



cables, used in the installation are of adequate 
rating and quality to meet the requirement of the 
load. General workmanship of the electrical 
wiring with regard to the layout and finish shall 
be examined for neatness that would facilitate 
easy identification of circuits of the system, ade- 
quacy of clearances, soundness of termination 
with respect to tightness, contact pressure and 
contact area. A complete check shall also be- 
made of all the protective devices, with respect 
to their ratings, range of settings and co-ordina- 
tion between the various protective devices. 

E>1.1 Items to be Inspected 

E-I.l.l Substation Installations — In substation 
installations, it shall be checked whether: 

1) The installation has been carried out in 
accordance with the approved drawings; 

2) Phase to phase and phase to earth clear- 
ances are provided as required; 

3) All equipments are efficiently earthed and 
properly connected to the required num- 
ber of earth electrodes; 

4) The required ground clearance to live- 
terminals is provided; 

5) Suitable fencing is provided with gate 
with locking arrangements; 

6) The required number of caution boards, 
fire-fighting equipments, operating rods, 
rubber mats, etc, are kept in the sub- 
station; 



74 



IS :732 - 1989 



7) In case of indoor substation, sufficient 
ventilation and draining arrangements 
are made; 

8) AH cable trenches are provided with non- 
inflammable covers; 

9.) Free accessibility is provided for all equip- 
ments for normal operation; 

10) All name plates are fixed and the equip- 
ments are fully painted; 

11) All construction materials and temporary 
connections are removed; 

12) Oil-levels, busbar tightness, transformer 
top position, etc, are in order; 

13) Earth pipe troughs and cover slabs are 
provided for earth electrodes /earth pits 
and the neutral and LA earth pits are 
marked for easy identification ; 

14) Earth electrodes are of GI pipes or CI 
pipes or copper plates. For earth connec- 
tions, brass bolts and nuts with lead 
washers are provided in the pipes/plates; 

15) Earth pipe troughs and oil sumps/ pits are 
free from rubbish and dirt and gravel 
and the earth connections are visible and 
easily accessible; 

16) HT and LT panels and switchgears are 
all vermin- and damp-proof and all 
unused openings or holes are blocked 
properly; 

17) The earth busbars have tight connections 
and corrosion-free joint surfaces; 

18) Control switch-fuses are provided at an 
accessible height from ground; 

19) Adequate headroom is available in the 
transformer room for easy topping-up of 
oil, maintenance etc; 

20) Safety devices, horizontal and vertical 
barriers, busbar covers/shrouds, auto- 
matic safety shutters/doors interlock, 
handle interlock are safe and in reliable 
operation in all panels and cubicles; 

21) Clearances in the front, rear and sides of 
the main HV and LT and sub-switch- 
boards are adequate; 

22) The gap in the horngap fuse and the size 
of fuse are adequate; 

23) The switches operate freely; the 3 blades 
make contact at the same time, the arcing 
horns contact in advance; and the 
handles are provided with locking 
arrangements; 

24) Insulators are free from cracks, and are 
clean; 

25) In transformers, there is any oil leak; 

26) Connections to bushings in transformers 
for tightness and good contact; 

27) Bushings are free from cracks and are 
clean; 



28) Accessories of transformers like breathers, 
vent pipe, buchholz relay, etc, are in 
order; 

29) Connections to gas relay in transformers 
are in order; 

30) Oil and winding temperature are set for 
specific requirements in transformers; 

31) In case of cable cellars, adequate arrange- 
ments to pump out water that has entered 
due to seepage or other reason; and 

32) All incoming and outgoing circuits of HT 
and LT panels are clearly and indelibly 
labelled for identifications. 

E-I.1.2 Medium Voltage Installation — In 
medium voltage installations, it shall be checked 
whether: 

1) All blocking materials that are used for 
safe transportation in switchgears, con- 
tactors, relays, etc, are removed; 

2) All connections to the earthing system are 
feasible for periodical inspection; 

3) Sharp cable bends are avoided and cables 
are taken in a smooth manner in the 
trenches or alongside the walls and ceil- 
ings using suitable support clamps at 
regular intervals; 

4) Suitable linked switch or circuit-breaker or 
lockable push button is provided near the 
motors/ apparatus for controlling supply 
to the motor/apparatus in an easily acces- 
sible location; 

5) Two separate and distinct earth connec- 
tions are provided for the motor/ appara- 
tus; 

6) Control switch-fuse is provided at an 
accessible height from ground for con- 
trolling supply to overhead travelling 
crane, hoists, overhead busbar trunking; 

7) The metal rails on which the crane travels 
are electrically continuous and earthed and 
bonding of rails and earthing at both ends 
are done; 

8) Four core cables are used for overhead 
travelling crane and portable equipment, 
the fourth core being used for earthing, and 
separate supply for lighting circuit is taken; 

9), If flexible metallic hose is used for wiring to 
motors and other equipment, the wiring is 
enclosed to the full lengths, and the hose 
secured properly by approved means; 

10) The cables are not taken through areas 
where they are likely to be damaged or 
chemically affected; 

11) The screens and armours of the cables are 
earthed properly; 

12) The belts of the belt driven equipments are 
properly guarded; 



75 



ISt 732 -1989 



13) Adequate precautions are taken to ensure 
that no live parts are so exposed as to cause 
danger; 

14) Ammeters and voltmeters are tested; and 

15) The relays are inspected visually by moving 
covers for deposits of dust or other foreign 
matter. 

£-1.1.3 Overhead Lines — For overhead lines it 
shall be checked whether: 

1 ) All conductors and apparatus including live 
parts thereof are inaccessible; 

2) The types and size of supports are suitable 
for the overhead lines/conductors used and 
are in accordance with approved drawing 
and standards; 

3) Clearances from ground level to the lowest 
conductor of overhead lines, sag conditions, 
etc, are in accordance with the relevant 
standard; 

4) Where overhead lines cross the roads or 
. cross each other or are in proximity with 

one another, suitable guarding is provided 
at road crossings and also to protect against 
possibility of the lines coming in contact 
with one another; 

5) Every guard wire is properly earthed; 

6) The type, size and suitability of the guard- 
ing arrangement provided is adequate; 

7) Stays are provided suitably on the overhead 
lines as required and are efficiently earthed 
or provided with suitable stay insulators of 
suitable voltages; 

8) Anti-climbing devices and Danger Board/ 
Caution Board/ Notices are provided on all 
HT supports; 

9) Clearances along the route are checked and 
all obstructions such as trees/ branches and 
shrubs are cleared on the route to the 
required distance on either side; 

10) Clearance between the live conductor and 
the earthed metal parts are adequate; and 

1 1) For the service connections tappcd-off from 
the overhead lines, cut- outs of adequate 
capacity are provided. 

E-l.1.4 Lighting Circuits — The lighting circuits 
shall be checked whether: 

1) Wooden boxes and panels are avoided in 
factories for mounting the lighting boards 
and switch controls, etc; 

2) Neutral links are provided in double pole 
switch-fuses which are used for lighting 
control, and no fuse is provided in the 
neutral; 



3) The plug points in the lighting circuit are 
all of 3-pin type, the third pin being 
suitably earthed; 

4) Tamper-proof interlocked switch socket and 
plug are used for locations easily accessible; 

5) Lighting wiring in factory area is taken 
enclosed in conduit and conduit properly 
earthed, or alternatively, armoured cable 
wiring is used; 

6) A separate earth wire is run in the lighting 
installation to provide earthing for plug 
points, fixtures and equipments; 

7) Proper connectors and junction boxes are 
used wherever joints are to be made in 
conductors or cross over of conductors takes 
place; 

8) Cartridge fuse units are fitted with cartridge 
fuses only; 

9) Clear and permanent identification marks 
are painted in all distribution boards, 
switchboards, sub-main boards and switches 
as necessary; 

10) The polarity having been checked and all 
fuses and single pole switches are connected 
on the phase conductor only and wiring is 
correctly connected to socket-outlets; 

11) Spare knockouts provided in distribution 
boards and switchfuses are blocked; 

12) The ends of conduits enclosing the wiring 
leads are provided with ebonite or other 
suitable bushes; 

13) The fittings and fixtures used for outdoor 
use are all of weatherproof construction, 
and similarly, fixtures, fittings and switch- 
gears used in the hazardous area are of 
flame-proof application; 

14) Proper terminal connectors are used for 
termination of wires ( conductors and earth 
leads ) and all strands are inserted in the 
terminals; 

15) Flat ended screws are used for fixing con- 
ductor to the accessories; and 

16) Use of flat washers backed up by spiing 
washers for making end connections is 
desirable. 



E-2. TESTING OF INSTALLATION 

E-2.0 General — After inspection, the following 
tests shall be carried out, before an installation or 
an addition to the existing installation is put into 
service. Any testing of the electrical installation 
in an already existing installation shall commence 
after obtaining permit to work from the cngineer- 
in-charge and after ensuring the safety provisions. 



76 



IS 1 732 - 1989 



E-2.1 Testing 

E-2.1.1 Switchboards— HT and LT switchboards 
shall be tested in the manner indicated below: 

1 ) All high voltage switchboards shall betested 
for dielectric test in the manner recom- 
mended in IS : 8623 ( Part 1 )-1977*. 

2) All earth connections shall be checked for 
continuity. 

3) The operation of all protective devices shall 
be tested by means of secondary or primary 
injection tests. 

4) The operation of the breakers shall be test- 
ed from all control stations. 

5) Indication/signalling lamps shall be checked 
for proper working. 

6) The operation of the breakers shall be tested 
for all interlocks. 

7) The closing and opening timings of the 
breakers shall be tested wherever required 
for auto-transfer schemes. 

8) Contact resistance of main and isolator 
contacts shall be measured. 

9) The specific gravity of electrolyte and the 
voltage of the control battery shall be 
measured. 

E-2.1. 2 Transformers — Transformers are tested 
in the manner indicated below: 

1) All commissioning tests as listed in IS : 
10028 ( Part 2 )-1981f shall be carried 
out. 

2) Insulation resistance on HT and LT wind- 
ings shall be measured at the end of one 
minute as also at the end of 10 minutes of 
measuring the polarization index. The 
absolute value of insulation resistance 
should not be the sole criterion for deter- 
mining the state of dryness of the insula- 
tion. Polarization index values should form 
the basis for determining the state of dry- 
ness of insulation. For any class of insulation 
the polarization index should be greater 
than 1-5. 

E-2.1. 3 Cables — Cable installations shall be 
checked as follows: 

1) It shall be ensured that the cables conform 
to the relevant Indian Standards. Tests 
shall also be done as laid down in IS : 
1255-1983J. The insulation resistance 
before and after the tests shall be checked. 



2) The insulation resistance between each con- 
ductor and against earth shall be measured 
The insulation resistance varies with the 
type of insulation used and with the length 
of cable. The following empirical rule gives 
reasonable guidance: 



Insulation resistance 
in megohms 



10 x voltage in kV 
length in km 



•Specification for factory-built assemblies of switchgear 
and controlgear for voltages up to and including 1 000 V ac 
and 1 200 V dc: Part 1 General requirements. 

tCode of practice for selection, installation and mainte- 
nance of transformers: Part 2 Installation. 

{Code of practice for installation and maintenance of 
power cables up to and including 33 kV ( stcond rtvision ). 



E-2.1.4 Motors and Other Equipments — The 
following tests are made on motor and other 
equipment: 

1) The insulation resistance of each phase 
winding against the frame and between the 
windings shall be measured. Megohmmeter 
of 500 V or 1 000 V rating shall be used. 
Star points should be disconnected. Mini- 
mum acceptable value of the insulation 
resistance varies with the rated power and 
the rated voltage of the motor. 

The following relation may serve as a 
reasonable guide: 

20 x E D 
a 1 000 -f 2P 
where 

Ri = insulation resistance in megohms 
at 25°C, 

E n = rated phase to phase voltage, and 

P = rated power in kW. 

If the resistance is measured at a temperature 
different from 25°C, the value shall be corrected 
to 25°C. 

The insulation resistance as measured at am- 
bient temperature does not always give a reliable 
vahie, since moisture might have been absorbed 
during shipment and storage. When the tempera- 
ture of such a motor is raised, the insulation 
resistance will initially drop considerably, even 
below the acceptable minimum. If any suspicion 
exists on this score, motor winding must be dried 
out. 

E-2.1. 5 Wiring Installation — The following tests 
shall be done: 

a) The insulation resistance shall be measured 
by applying between earth and the whole 
system of conductor or any section thereof 
with all fuses in place and all switches 
closed, and except in earthed concentric 
wiring, all lamps in position or both poles 
of installation otherwise electrically connec- 
ted together, a dc voltage of not less than 
twice the working voltage, provided that it 
does not exceed 500 volts for medium 
voltage circuits. Where the supply is derived 
from three-wire ( ac or dc ) or a poly-phase 
system, the neutral pole of which is connec- 
ted to earth either direct or through added 



77 



IS : 732 - 1989 



resistance the working voltage shall be 
deemed to be that which is maintained 
between the outer or phase conductor and 
the neutral, 

b) The insulation resistance in megohms of an 
installation measured as in (a) shall not be 
less than 50 divided by the number of 
points on the circuit, provided that the 
whole installation need not be required to 
have an insulation resistance greater than 
one megohm. 

c) Control rheostats, heating and power appli- 
ances and electric signs, may, if desired, be 
disconnected from the circuit during the 
test, but in that event the insulation resis- 
tance between the case or framework, and 
all live parts of each rheostat, appliance 
and sign shall be not less than that specified 
in the relevant Indian Standard Specifica- 
tion or where there is no such specification 
shall be not less than half a megohm. 

d) The insulation resistance shall also be 
measured between all conductors connected 
to one pole or phase conductor of the 
supply and all the conductors connected to 
the middle wire or to the neutral on to the 
other pole of phase conductors of the supply. 



Such a test shall be made after removing 
all metallic connections between the two 
poles of the installation and in these 
circumstances the insulation resistance be- 
tween conductors of the installation shall 
be not less than that specified in (b). 

On completion of an electrical installation ( Or 
an extension to an installation ) a certificate shall 
be furnished by the contractor, countersigned by 
the certified supervisor under whose direct super- 
vision the installation was carried out. This 
certificate shall be in a prescribed form as required 
by the local electric supply authority. 

E-2.1.6 Earthing — For checking the efficiency 
of earthing the following tests are done: 

The earth resistance of each electrode shall 
be measured. 



a) 



The earth resistance of earthing grid shall 
be measured. 

All electrodes shall be connected to the grid 
and the earth resistance of the entire earth- 
ing system shall be measured. 

These tests shall preferably be done during the 
summer months. 



78 



