**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 4254 (1994) : Jaw crushers - General requirements [MED 
17: Chemical Engineering Plants and Related Equipment] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 4254 : 19M& 

( q?cn q^ftsro ) 

Indian Standard 

JAW CRUSHERS — GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

( First Revision ) 



UDC 621^2622 



(Q BIS 1994 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARC. 
NEW DFLHI 110002 

November 1994 Price Group 2 



Chemical Hngincering plants and Related Equipment Sectional Committee, HMD 17 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the 
draft finali/.ed by the Chemical Engineering Plants and Related Equipment Sectional Committee 
had been approved by the Heavy Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 

This Indian Standard was first published in 1967. This revision has been brought out to bring it in 
line with the latest industrial practice being followed in the country. In this revision following 
changes have been incorporated: 

a) Requirements for jaws added, and 

b) The information to be supplied by the purchaser and the manufacturer updated. 

Jaw crushers are generally used for crushing rock and similar hard material and contain two 
rectangular surfaces of jaws, one of which alternately approaches and recedes from the other. The 
jaws contain an angle and together with two side plates, enclose a wedge shaped cavity which is 
wider at the upper or feed end. The material which is fed at the upper end gets crushed mainly by 
compression between the two jaws and discharges through the outlet. 



Particulars regarding information to be given to the manufacturer by the purchaser with enquiry 
order and the information to be furnished by the manufacturer to the purchaser along with 
quotation are given in Annex A and B respectively. 



or 
the 



For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the 
linal value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in 
accordance with IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )\ The number of 
significant places retained in the rounded olf value should be the same as that to the specified value 
in this standard 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 DECEMBER 1999 

TO 

IS 4254 : 1994 JAW CRUSHERS — GENERAL 

REQUIREMENTS 

( First Revision ) 

( P age 2, clause K.l ) — Delete K.l and renumber the subsequent clause. 

( Page 3, Annex C ) — Substitute '7' for '7.1 \ 

[ Page 3, clause C-2.1(b), first line ) — Delete the words 'after dismantling 
the crustier'. 

| Page 3, clause < '-2.1(b) J — Insert the following Nole at llie end of the 
clause: 

'NO' Hi — Only prototype crusher shall be dismantled to carry out inspection after the trial 
run to ensurr items 1 to 4 above. All others shall be inspected without dismantling.' 



(MED 17) 



IS 4254 : 1994 



Indian Standard 
JAW CRUSHERS — GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

( First Revision ) 



1 SCOPE 

This Indian Standard covers the jaw crushers 
which are commonly used for crushing rocks 

2 NOMENCLATURE 

2.1 For the purpose of this standard the various 
components of the jaw crusher shall be designated 
as in Fig. 1. 

2.1.1 Jaw Crusher 

A machine for crushing rock mainly by com- 
pression between two rectangular surfaces or 
jaws, one of which ( rarely both ) alternately 
approaches and recedes from the other. 

3 CLASSIFICATION 

3.1 For the purpose of this standard jaw crushers 
shall be classified as follows 



3.1.1 Depending Upon the Operating Mechanism 

a) Double-toggle jaw crusher — A crushing 
machine operating on the kinematic scheme 
as shown in Fig. '2 wherein the moving jaw 
possesses a simple motion of approaching 
to and receding from the fixed jaw into 
linear path. 

b) Single-toggle jaw crusher — A crushing 
machine operating on the kinematic scheme 
as shown in Fig. 3 wherein the moving jaw 
possesses a compound motion. 

3.1.2 Depending Upon the Size of the Jaws 

a) Jaw crusher with normal width, where the 
ratio l/b is between 1*4 and 16, where 
1 and b denote respectively the width of 
the jaw and minimum feed gap respectively. 

b) Jaw crusher with extended width, where the 
ratio l/b is between 2*2 and 5'7, where I 
and b denote respectively the width of the 
jaw and minimum feed gap respectively. 



SWING JAW PLATE 
CHEEK PLATE 



FIXED JAW 
PLATE 



FLYWHEEL ECCENTRIC SHAFT 

ECCENTRIC SHAFT 

BEARING 




/ TOGGLE SEAT \ \ TOGGLE 



Fig. 1 Nomenclature for Jaw Crushers 

I 



IS 4254 : 1994 




Fig. 2 Kinematic Scheme for Douhle- 
Toggle Jaw Crusher 




Fig. 3 Kinematic Schbmh ior Single- 
Toggle Jaw Crushhr 

4 SIZE 

The size of the jaw crusher shall be designated 
by the jaw width and the charging gap width in 
millimetres. 



5 DESIGNATION 

The designation of a 
include: 

a) Commonly used name, 

b) Jaw width in mm, 



jaw crusher shall 



c) Minimum feed gap in mm, 

d) Minimum gap at the delivery end in mm, 

e) Whether single-toggle or double-toggle, and 

f) Number of this standard. 

Example: 

A jaw crusher with 400 mm jaw width, 
250 mm minimum feed gap, 20 mm 
minimum gap at the delivery end and of 
single-toggle type shall be designated as: 

Jaw Crusher 400 x 250/20 ST IS 4254 

6 MARKING 

Fach jaw crusher shall have suitable metal 
plate on the body carrying following data in 
legible form: 

a) Indication of the source of manufacture, 

b) Serial number/year of manufacture of the 
machine, 

c) Size, 

d) Capacity, and 

e) Power consumption. 

7 SUPPLY 

The manufacturer shall supply a certificate 
to the purchaser along with each machine certify- 
ing that the crusher has been inspected for 
freedom from visible defect and the crusher has 
satisfactorily withstood the trial run. Items to 
be covered under this certificate are given in 
Annex C. 

8 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

8.1 The immovable jaw shall be hinged so that 
it could be removed in case of choking during 
operation. This shall be done by hinges and 
locking nut-bolt arrangement which shall be used 
to open fixed jaw to release the choked material. 
This shall be provided at least for small capacity 
jaw crushers. 

8.2 Both the jaw plates shall be provided with 
rough surface to increase the grip on the crushing 
material and to minimize the slipping of 
material. 



IS 4254 : 1994 



ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 

INFORMATION TO BE SUPPLIFD BY THE PURCHASER TO THE 
MANUFACTURER WITH THE ENQUIRY AND ORDER 



A-l The enquiry and order by the purchaser 
should state: 

a) Material; 

b) Bulk density, tonnes/m s ; 

c) 1) Type of material 

(Hygroscopic, soft, brittle, etc ); 

2) Moisture contents, percent; 

d) Structure of material 

( crystalline, granular, flaky ); 



e) Crushing strength, if possible, N/m 2 ; 

f) Feed size, mm; 

g) Chemical property, corrosion with iron, etc; 
h) Product si/c, mm; 

j) Capacity of crusher required, tonnes/hour; 

k) Ultimate use of material 

(Permissibility of iron in product ); and 

m) Any other remarks. 



ANNEX B 
( Foreword ) 

INFORMATION TO BE FURNISHED BY THE MANUFACTURER TO THE PURCHASER 
ALONG WITH THE QUOTATION AND SUPPLY 



B-l The manufacturer shall give the following 
information along with his quotation and supply: 

a) Size and designation 

( Single-toggle/double-toggle, hinged/fixed 
jaw, type of grooves on plates); 

b) Maximum feed opening, mm; 

c) Minimum and maximum opening at the 
bottom of jaw, mm; 

d) Maximum recommended feed size, mm; 

e) Capacity of crusher with respect to dis- 
charge opening, tonnes/h; 

f) Energy consumed to crush the material 
kW/tonne; and 



g) Material of construction with regard to the 
following major components of the jaw 
crusher; 

1) Frame, 

2) Swing jaw, 

3) Swing jaw shaft, 

4) Pitman, 

5) Pitman shaft, 

6) Pitman shaft bearing, 

7) Jaw plates, 

8) Cheek plates, 

9) Toggle, and 
10) Fly wheel. 



ANNEX C 
( Clause 7.1 ) 

INFORMATION TO BE GIVEN IN THE CERTIFICATE BY THE MANUI AC 
TO THE PURCHASER AT THE TIME OF SUPPLYING MACHINE 



IURFR 



C-l INSPECTION 

C-l.l The inspection report shall state that each 
part of the crusher has been inspected before 
painting to ensure that it is free from any visible 
defects in casting, machining, etc. 

C-2 TEST-RUN 

C-2.1 The test-run report shall state: 

a) The number of hours the crusher has been 



run continuously under no load after 
completion of the assembly, and 
b) That after dismantling the crusher after the 
trial run inspection has been earned out to 
ensure that: 

1) The construction of the crusher is 
satisfactory, 

2) Lubricating condition is satisfactory, 

3) There is no slackness or unusual wear 
on any component, and 

4) The bearings are evenly loaded. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Acr, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending t<> connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of" all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in 
any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the 
course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade 
designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are 
issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of 
the latest amendments or edition. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. HMD 17(0086) 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan. 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

( Common to all Offices ) 

Regional Offices- 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M. V. I. P. Road. Maniktola 
CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A. CHANDIGARH 160022 

Southern : C. 1. T. Campus, IV Cross Road. MADRAS 600113 1235 02 16, 235 04 42 

1235 13 19, 235 23 15 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 M1DC. Marol, Andhen ( East ) 1632 92 95, 632 78 58 

BOMBAY 400093 1632 78 91. 632 78 92 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR 
LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 





Telephone 




(331 01 31 
[331 13 75 


37 84 99, 
37 86 26. 


37 85 61 
37 86 62 




160 38 43 
)60 20 25 



Printed at Printrade. New Delhi. India 



