•••••••••••••••• 


^  is^ 


T-^^^i^ 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live' 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New' 


&^Jfffc^:c»^j^^fffiAfe^icOv^^a^T^s&=^Irt^^^ 


IS  13311-1  (1992) :  Method  of  Non-destructive  testing  of 
concret,  Part  1:  Ultrasonic  pulse  velocity  [CED  2:  Cement 
and  Concrete] 


>^^lllfcJ^9>^^bv/ff^feial>^h:>^^Ts;>&^T^FS 


5?aiU  I  l>ft=55S5&'>S*^ 


^^:<xvvv^i^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


BLANK  PAGE 


*Tsr- 


^^ 


iA*^*^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


IS  13311  (  Parti  ) :  1992 

(  Reaffirmed  2004 ) 

Indian  Standard 

NON-DESTRUCTIVE  TESTING  OF  CONCRETE  - 

METHODS  OF  TEST 

PART  1     ULTRASONIC  PULSE  VELOCITY 


First  Reprint  SEPTEMBER  1996 


UDC    666-972-620179-16 


©  BISn992 

BUREAU     OF     INDIAN    STANDARDS 

MANAK   BHAVAN,  9  BAHADUR  SHAH  ZAFAR  MARG 

NEW  DELHI  110002 

January  1992  Price  Group  4 


Cement  and  Concrete  Sectional  Committee,  CED  2 


FOREWORD 

This  Indian  Standard  was  adopted  by  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards,  after  the  draft  finalized 
by  the  Cement  and  Concrete  Sectional  Committee  had  been  approved  by  the  Civil  Engineertng 
Division  Council. 

There  are  occasions  when  the  various  performance  characteristics  of  concrete  in  a  structure  are 
required  to  be  assessed.  In  most  of  the  cases,  an  estimate  of  strength  of  concrete  in  the  structure 
is  needed,  although  parameters  like  overall  quality,  uniformity,  etc,  also  become  important  in 
others.  The  various  methods  that  can  be  adopted  for /m-j/7m  assessment  of  strength  properties 
of  concrete  depend  upon  the  particular  aspect  of  the  strength  in  question.  For  example,  if  the 
load-carrying  capacity  of  a  structural  ensemble  is  to  be  assessed,  carrying  out  a  full-scale  load 
test  as  per  IS  456  :  1978  'Code  of  practice  for  plain  and  reinforced  concrete  (  third  revision  )'  or 
IS  1343  :  1980  'Code  of  practice  for  prestressed  concrete  {first  revision  )'  is  the  most  direct  way; 
on  the  other  hand  when  the  actual  compressive  strength  of  concrete  in  the  structure  is  to  be 
measured,  core  testing  as  per  IS  516  :  1959  'Method  of  test  for  strength  of  concrete'  is  more 
reliable.  However,  both  these  methods  are  relatively  cumbersome  and  the  latter  method  may 
leave  the  structure  damaged  locally  in  some  cases.  Use  is,  therefore,  made  of  suitable  non- 
destructive tests,  which  not  only  provide  an  estimate  of  the  relative  strength  and  overall  quality 
of  concrete  in  the  structure  but  also  help  in  deciding  whether  more  rigorous  tests  like  load  test- 
ing or  core  drilling  at  selected  locations  are  required. 

There  are  vairious  such  non-destructive  testing  methods  which  can  be  broadly  classified  as  those 
which  measure  the  overall  quality  of  concrete,  for  example  dynamic  or  vibration  methods  like 
resonance  frequency  and  ultrasonic  pulse  velocity  tests  and  those  which  involve  measurement  of 
parameters  like  surface  hardness,  rebound,  penetration,  pull-out  strength,  etc,  and  are  believed 
to  be  indirectly  related  to  the  compressive  strength  of  concrete.  In  addition,  radiographic, 
radiometric,  nuclear,  magnetic  and  electrical  methods  are  also  available.  Since  sjuch 
non-destructive  tests  are  at  best  indirect  methods  of  monitoring  the  particulars,  characte- 
ristic of  concrete  and  the  measurements  are  influenced  by  materials,  mix  and  environmental 
factors,  proper  interpretation  of  the  results  calls  for  certain  degree  of  expertise.  It  is  more  so, 
when  the  data  on  the  materials  and  mix  proportions  used  in  the  construction  are  not  available, 
as  is  often  the  case. 

In  view  of  the  limitations  of  the  methods  for  predicting  the  strength  of  concrete  in  the  structure 
it  is  preferable  that  both  ultrasonic  pulse  velocity  and  rebound  hammer  methods  given  in  Part  2 
of  the  standard  are  used  in  combination  to  alleviate  the  errors  arising  out  of  influence  of 
material,  mix  and  environmental  parameters  on  the  respective  measurements.  Relationships 
between  pulse  velocity,  rebound  number  and  compressive  strength  of  concrete  are  obtained  by 
multiple  regression  of  the  measured  values  on  laboratory  test  specimens.  However,  this  approach 
has  the  limitation  that  the  correlations  are  valid  only  for  the  materials  and  mix  proportions 
used  in  trials.  The  intrinsic  difference  between  the  laboratory  test  specimens  and  in-situ  con- 
crete, for  example,  surface  texture,  moisture  condition,  presence  of  reinforcement,  etc,  also  affect 
the  accuracy  of  results.  The  correlation  is  valid  only  within  the  range  of  values  of  pulse  velocity 
rebound  number  and  compressive  strength  employed  and  any  extrapolation  beyond  these  is  open 
to  question. 

Because  of  the  above  limitations,  the  combined  use  of  these  two  methods  is  made  in  another  way. 
In  this,  if  the  quality  of  concrete  is  assessed  to  be  'excellent  or  good'  by  pulse  velocity  method, 
only  then  the  compressive  strength  is  assessed  from  the  rebound  manner  indices  and  this  is  taken 
as  indicative  of  strength  of  concrete  in  the  entire  cross-section  of  the  concrete  member.  When 
the  quality  assessed  is 'medium',  the  estimation  of  compressive  strength  by  rebound  indices  is 
extended  to  the  entire  mass  only  on  the  basis  of  other  colateral  measurements,  for  example, 
strength  of  site  concrete  cubes,  cement  content  in  the  concrete  or  core  testing.  When  the  quality 
of  concrete  is  doubtful,  no  assessment  of  concrete  strength  is  made  from   rebound  indices. 

(  Continued  on  third  Cover  ) 


IS  t33U  (  Part  1 )  :  1992 

Indian  Standard 

NON-DESTRUCTIVE  TESTING  OF  CONCRETE  - 

METHODS  OF  TEST 

PART  1     ULTRASONIC  PULSE  VELOCITY 


1  SCOPE 

1.1  This  standard  covers  the  object,  principle, 
apparatus  and  test  procedure  of  ultrasonic  pulse 
velocity  test  method.  In  addition,  influence  of 
test  conditions  and  some  general  guidance  on 
the  interpretation  of  test  results  are  also  given. 

NOTE  —  In  view  of  the  limitations  of  each  method 
of  non-destructive  testing  of  concrete,  it  is  essential 
that  the  results  of  tests  obtained  by  one  method 
should  be  complimented  by  other  tests  and  each 
method  should  be  a4opted  very  carefully. 

2  OBJECT 

2.1  The  ultrasonic  pulse  velocity  method  could 
be  used  to  establish; 

a)  the  homogeneity  of  the  concrete, 

b)  the  presence  of  cracks,   voids  and  other 
imperfections, 

c)  changes  in  the  structure  of  the   concrete 
which  may  occur  with  time, 

d)  the  quality  of  the  concrete  in  relation  to 
standard  requirements, 

e)  the  quality  of  one  element  of  concrete  in 
relation  to  another,  and 

f )  the  values  of  dynamic  elastic  modulus  of 
the  concrete. 

3  PRINCIPLE 

3.1  The  ultrasonic  pulse  is  generated  by  an 
electroacoustical  transducer.  ,When  the  pulse  is 
induced  into  the  concrete  from  a  transducer,  it 
undergoes  multiple  reflections  at  the  boundaries 
of  the  difiFere?nt  material  phases  within  the  con- 
crete. A  complex  system  of  stress  waves  is 
developed  which  includes  longitudinal  (  comp- 
ressional),  shear  ( transverse )  and  surface 
(  rayleigh )  waves.  The  receiving  transducer 
detects  the  onset  of  the  longitudinal  waves, 
which  is  the   fastest. 

Because  the  velocity  of  the  pulses  is  almost 
independent  of  the  geometry  of  the  material 
through  which  they  pass  and  depends  only  on 
its  elastic  properties,  pulse  velocity  method  is  a 
convenient  technique  for  investigating  structural 
concrete. 


The  underlying  principle  of  assessing  the  quality 
of  concrete  is  that  comparatively  higher  velo- 
cities are  obtained  when  the  quality  of  concrete 
in  terms  of  density,  homogeneity  and  uniformity 
is  good.  In  case  of  poorer  quality,  lower  velo- 
cities are  obtained.  If  there  is  a  crack,  void  or 
flaw  inside  the  concrete  which  comes  in  the  way 
of  transmission  of  the  pulses,  the  pulse  strength 
is  attenuated  and  it  passes  around  the  discon- 
tinuity, thereby  making  the  path  length  longer. 
Consequently,  lower  velocities  are  obtained. 
The  actual  pulse  velocity  obtained  depends 
primarily  upon  the  materials  and  mix  propor- 
tions of  concrete.  Density  and  modulus  of 
elasticity  of  aggregate  also  significantly  affect 
the  pulse  velocity. 

4  APPARATUS 

4.1  The  apparatus  for  ultrasonic  pulse  velocity 
measurement  shall  consist  of  the  following: 

a)  Electrical  pulse  generator, 

b)  Transducer  —  one  pair, 

c)  Amplifier,  and 

d)  Electronic  timing  device. 

4.1.1  Transducer 

Any  suitable  type  of  transducer  operating  with- 
in the  frequency  range  of  20  kHz  to  150  kHz  ( see 
Table  1  )  may  be  used.  Piezoelectric  and 
magneto-strictive  types  of  transducers  may  be 
used,  the  latter  being  more  suitable  for  the  lower 
part  of  the  frequency  range. 

Table  1    Natural  Frequency  of  Transducers  for 
Different  Path  Lengths 


Minimum  Transyerse 

Dimensions  of 

Members 

(mm) 

25 

70 
150 
300 


Path  Length 

Natural  Frequency 
of  Transdueer 

(mm) 

(kHz) 

Up  to  500 

ISO 

500-700 

>  60 

700-1500 

>  40 

above  I  500 

>  20 

IS  13311  (  Part  1 ) :  1992 


4.1.2  Electronic  Timing  Device 

It  shall  be  capable  of  measuring  the  time  inter- 
val elapsing  between  the  onset  of  a  pulse  gene- 
rated at  the  transmitting  transducer  and  the 
onset  of  its  arrival  at  the  receiving  transducer. 
Two  forms  of  the  electronic  tinaing  apparatus 
are  possible,  one  of  which  uses  a  cathode  ray 
tube  on  which  the  leading  edge  of  the  pulse  is 
displayed  in  relation  to  the  suitable  time  scale, 
the  other  uses  an  interval  timer  with  a  direct 
reading  digital  display.  If  both  the  forms  of 
timing  apparatus  are  available,  the  interpretation 
of  results  becomes  more  reliable. 

4.2  Performance  of  the  Assembly  of  Apparatus 

The  apparatus  should  be  capable  of  measuring 
transit  times  to  an  accuracy  of  ±  1  percent  over 
a  range  of  20  microseconds  to  10  milliseconds. 
For  this,  it  is  necessary  to  check  the  overall 
performance  by  making  measurements  on  two 
standard  reference  specimens  in  which  the  pulse 
transit  times  are  known  accurately.  The  two 
reference  specimens  (  usually  steel  bars  )  should 
have  pulse  transit  times  of  about  25  micro- 
seconds to  100  microseconds  respectively;  these 
times  being  specified  by  the  supplier  of  the 
equipment  to  an  accuracy  of  ±0-2  microsecond. 
The  shorter  of  the  reference  specimens  should 
be  used  to  set  the  zero  for  the  apparatus  and 
the  longer  one  should  be  used  to  check  the 
accuracy  of  transit  time  measurement  of  the 
apparatus.  The  measurement  obtained  should 
not  differ  from  the  known  value  for  the  refe- 
rence specimen  by  more  than'  ±0-5  percent. 

4.2.1  The  electronic  excitation  pulse  applied  to 
the  transmitting  transducer  should  have  a  rise 
time  of  not  greater  than  one  quarter  of  its  natu- 
ral period.  This  is  to  ensure  a  sharp  pulse  onset. 

4.2.2  The  interval  between  pulses  should  be  low 
enough  to  ensure  that  the  onset  of  the  received 
signal  in  small  concrete  test  specimens  is  free 
from  interference  by  reverberations  produced 
within  the  preceding  working  cycle. 

4.2.3  The  apparatus  should  maintain  its  perfor- 
mance over  the  range  of  ambient  temperature, 
humidity  and  power  supply  voltage  stated  by 
the  supplier. 

5  PROCEDURE 

5.1  In  this  test  method,  the  ultrasonic  pulse  is 
produced  by  the  transducer  which  is  held  in 
contact  with  one  surface  of  the  concrete  member 
under  test.  After  traversing  a  known  path  length 
(L)  in  the  concrete,  the  pulse  of  vibrations  is 
converted  into  an  electrical  signal  by  the  second 
transducer  held  in  contact  with  the  other  sur- 
face of  the  concrete  member  and  an  electronic 


timing  circuit  enables  the  transit  time  (  T  )  of 
the  pulse  to  be  measured.  The  pulse  velocity  (V) 
is  given  by: 

V  =  L/T 

Once  the  ultrasonic  pulse  impinges  on  the 
surface  of  the  material,  the  maximum  energy  is 
propagated  at  right  angles  to  the  face  of  the 
transmitting  transducer  and  best  results  are, 
therefore,  obtained  when  the  receiving  trans- 
ducer is  placed  on  the  opposite  face  of  the 
concrete  member  (  direct  transmission  or  cross 
probing ).  However,  in  many  situations  two 
opposite  faces  of  the  structural  member  may 
not  be  accessible  for  measurements.  In  such 
cases,  the  receiving  transducer  is  also  placed  on 
the  same  face  of  the  concrete  members  (surface 
probing  ).  Surface  probing  is  not  so  efficient  as 
cross  probing,  because  the  signal  produced  at 
the  receiving  transducer  has  an  amplitude  of  only 
2  to  3  percent  of  that  produced  by  cross  probing 
and  the  test  results  are  greatly  influenced  by  the 
surface  layers  of  concrete  which  may  have 
different  properties  from  that  of  concrete  inside 
the  structural  member.  The  indirect  velocity  is 
invariably  lower  than  the  direct  velocity  on  the 
same  concrete  element.  This  difference  may  vary 
from  5  to  20  percent  depending  largely  on  the 
quality  of  the  concrete  under  test.  For  good 
quality  concrete,  a  difference  of  about  0-5  km/ 
sec  may  generally  be  encountered. 

To  ensure  that  the  ultrasonic  pulses,  generated 
at  the  transmitting  transducer  pass  into  the 
concrete  and  are  then  detected  by  the  receiving 
transducer,  it  is  essential  that  there  be  adequate 
acoustical  coupling  between  the  concrete  and 
the  face  of  each  transducer.  Typical  couplants 
are  petroleum  jelly,  grease,  liquid  soap  and 
kaolin  glycerol  paste.  If  there  is  very  rough 
concrete  surface,  it  is  required  to  smoothen  and 
level  an  area  of  the  surface  where  the  transducer 
is  to  be  placed.  If  it  is  necessary  to  work  on 
concrete  surfaces  formed  by  other  means,  for 
example  trowelling,  it  is  desirable  to  measure 
pulse  velocity  over  a  longer  path  length  than 
would  normally  be  used.  A  minimum  path  length 
of  150  mm  is  recommended  for  the  direct  trans- 
mission method  involving  one  unmoulded  sur- 
face and  a  minimum  of  400  mm  for  the  surface 
probing  method  along  an  unmoulded  surface. 

5,2  The  natural  frequency  of  transducers  should 
preferably  be  within  the  range  of  20  to  150  kHz 
(  see  Table  1  ).  Generally,  high  frequency  trans- 
ducers are  preferable  for  short  path  lengths  and 
low  frequency  transducers  for  long  path  lengths. 
Transducers  with  a  frequency  of  50  to  60  k  Hz 
are  useful  for  most  all-round  applications. 


IS  13311  (  Part  1 ) :  1992 


S3  Since  size  of  aggregates  influences  the  pulse 
velocity  measurement,  it  is  recommended  that 
the  minimum  path  length  should  be  100  mm  for 
concrete  in  which  the  nominal  maximum  size  of 
aggregate  is  20  mm  or  less  and  150  mm  for 
concrete  in  which  the  nominal  maximum  size  of 
aggregate  is  between  20  to  40  mm. 

5.4  In  view  of  the  inherent  variability  in  the  test 
results,  sufficient  number  of  readings  are  taken 
by  dividing  the  entire  structure  in  suitable  grid 
markings  of  30x30  cm  or  even  smaller.  Each 
junction  point  of  the  grid  becomes  a  point  of 
observation. 

Transducers  are  held  on  corresponding  points 
of  observation  on  opposite  faces  of  a  structural 
element  to  measure  the  ultrasonic  pulse  velocity 
by  direct  transmission,  i.e.,  cross  probing.  If  one 
of  the  faces  is  not  accessible,  ultrasonic  pulse 
velocity  is  measured  on  one  face  of  the  structu- 
ral member  by  surface  probing. 

5.4.1  Surface  probing  in  general  gives  lower 
pulse  velocity  than  in  case  of  cross  probing  and 
depending  on  number  of  parameters,  the  diffe- 
rence could  be  of  the  order  of  about  1  km/sec. 

6  INFLUENCE  OF  TEST  CONDITIONS 

6.1  Influence  of  Surface  Conditions  and  Moisture 
Content  of  Concrete 

Smoothness  of  contact  surface  under  test  affects 
the  measurement  of  ultrasonic  pulse  velocity. 
For  most  concrete  surfaces,  the  finish  is  usually 
sufficiently  smooth  to  ensure  good  acoustical 
contact  by  the  use  of  a  coupling  medium  and 
by  pressing  the  transducer  against  the  concrete 
surface.  When  the  concrete  surface  is  rough  and 
uneven,  it  is  necessary  to  smoothen  the  surface 
to  make  the  pulse  velocity  measurement 
possible. 

In  general,  pulse  velocity  through  concrete 
increases  with  increased  moisture  content  of 
concrete.  This  influence  is  more  for  low  strength 
concrete  than  high  strength  concrete.  The  pulse 
velocity  of  saturated  concrete  may  be  up  to  2 
percent  higher  than  that  of  similar  dry  concrete. 
In  general,  drying  of  concrete  may  result  in 
somewhat  lower  pulse  velocity. 

6.2  Influence  of  Path  Length,  Shape  and  Size  of 
the  Concrete  Member 

As  concrete  is  inherently  heterogeneous,  it  is 
essential  that  path  lengths  be  sufficiently  long 
so  as  to  avoid  any  error  introduced  due  to  its 
heterogeneity.  In  field  work,  this  does  not  pose 
any  difficulty  as  the  pulse  velocity  measurements 
are  carried  out  on  thick  structural  concrete 
members.  However,  in  the  laboratory  where 
generally  small  specimens  are  used,  the  path 
length  can  affect  the  pulse  velocity  readings. 


The  shape  and  size  of  the  concrete  member  do 
not  influence  the  pulse  velocity  unless  the  least 
lateral  dimension  is  less  than  a  certain  minimum 
value,  for  example  the  minimum  lateral  dimen- 
sion of  about  80  mm  for  50  kHz  natural 
frequency  of  the  transducer.  Table  1  gives  the 
guidance  on  the  choice  of  the  transducer  natural 
frequency  for  different  path  lengths  and  mini- 
mum transverse  dimensions  of  the  concrete 
members. 

6.3  Influence  of  Temperature  of  Concrete 

Variations  of  the  concrete  temperature  between 
5  and  30°C  do  not  significantly  affect  the  pulse 
velocity  measurements  in  concrete.  At  tempera- 
tures between  30  to  60°C,  there  can  be  reduc- 
tion in  pulse  velocity  up  to  5  percent.  Below 
freezing  temperature,  the  free  water  freezes  with- 
in concrete,  resulting  in  an  increase  in  pulse 
velocity  up  to  7-5  percent. 

6.4  Influence  of  Stress 

When  concrete  is  subjected  to  a  stress  which  is 
abnormally  high  for  the  quality  of  the  concrete, 
the  pulse  velocity  may  be  reduced  due  to  the 
development  of  micro-cracks.  This  influence  is 
likely  to  be  the  greatest  when  the  pulse  path  is 
normal  to  the  predominent  direction  of  the 
planes  of  such  micro-cracks.  This  occurs  when 
the  pulse  path  is  perpendicular  to  the  direction 
of  a  uniaxial  compressive  stress  in  a  member. 

This  influence  is  generally  insignificant  unless 
the  stress  is  greater  than  about  60  percent  of  the 
ultimate  strength  of  the  concrete. 

6.5  Effect  of  Reinforcing  Bars 

The  pulse  velocity  measured  in  reinforced  con- 
crete in  the  vicinity  of  reinforcing  bars  is 
usually  higher  than  in  plain  concrete  of  the 
same  composition.  This  is  because,  the  pulse 
velocity  in  steel  is  1-2  to  1-9  times  the  velocity 
in  plain  concrete  and,  under  certain  conditions, 
the  first  pulse  to  arrive  at  the  receiving  trans- 
ducer travels  partly  in  concrete  and  partly  in 
steel. 

The  apparent  increase  in  pulse  velocity  depends 
upon  the  proximity  of  the  measurements  to  the 
reinforcing  bar,  the  diameter  and  number  of  the 
bars  and  their  orientation  with  respect  to  the 
path  of  propagation. 

7  INTERPRETATION  OF  RESULTS 

7.1  The  ultrasonic  puke  velocity  of  concrete  is 
mainly  related  to  its  density  and  modulus  of 
elasticity.  This  in  turn,  depends  upon  the 
materials  and  mix  proportions  us6d  in   making 


IS  13311  (  Part  1 )  :  1992 


concrete  as  well  as  the  method  of  placing, 
compaction  and  curing  of  concrete 

For  example,  if  the  concrete  is  not  compacted 
as  thoroughly  as  possible,  or  if  there  is  segrega- 
tion of  concrete  during  placing  or  there  are 
internal  cracks  or  flaws ,  the  pulse  velocity  will 
be  lower,  although  the  same  materials  and  mix 
proportions  are  used. 

7.1.1  The  quality  of  concrete  in  terms  of  uni- 
formity, incidence  or  absence  of  internal  flaws, 
cracks  and  segregation,  etc,  indicative  of  the 
level  of  workmanship  employed,  can  thus  be 
assessed  using  the  guidelines  given  in  Table  2, 
which  have  been  evolved  for  characterising  the 
quality  of  concrete  in  structures  in  terms  of  the 
ultrasonic  pulse  velocity. 

Table  2  Velocity  Criterion  for  Concrete 
Quality  Grading 


SI      Pulse  Velocity  by 
No.      Cross  Probing 
(  km/sec  ) 

Concrete  Quality 
Grading 

1.        Above  4-5 

Excellent 

2.       3-5  to  4-5 

Good 

3.        30  to  3-5 

Medium 

4.       Below  3-0 

Doubtful 

Note  —  Incase  of  "doubtful"  quality  it  may  be 
necessary  to  carry  out  further  tests. 

7i2  Since  actual  values  of  the  pulse  velocity 
obtained,  depend  on  a  number  of  parameters, 
any  criterion  for  assessing  the  quality  of  concrete 
on  the  basis  of  pulse  velocity  as  given  in  Table  2 
can  be  held  as  satisfactory  only  to  a  general 
extent.  However,  when  the  comparison  is  made 
amongst  different  parts  of  a  structure,  which 
have  been  built  at  the  same  time  with  supposedly 
similar  materials,  construction  practices  and 
supervision,  the  assessment  of  quality  becomes 
more  meaningful  and  reliable. 

7.3  The  assessment  of  compressive  strength  of 
concrete  from  ultrasonic  pulse  velocity  values 
is  not  adequate  because  the  statistical  confidence 
of  the  correlation  between  ultrasonic  pulse 
velocity  and  the  compressive  strength  of  con- 
crete is  not  very  high.  The  reason  is  that  a  large 
number  of  parameters  are  involved,  which 
influence  the  pulse  velocity  and  compressive 
strength  of  concrete  to  different  extents.    How- 


ever, if  actual  concrete  materials  and  mix 
proportions  adopted  in  a  particular  structure  are 
available,  then  estimate  of  concrete  strength  can 
be  made  by  establishing  suitable  correlation 
between  the  pulse  velocity  and  the  compressive 
strength  of  concrete  specimens  made  with  such 
materials  and  mix  proportions,  under  environ- 
mental conditions  similar  to  that  in  the  structure. 
The  estimated  strength  may  vary  from  the  actual 
strength  by  i  20  percent.  The  correlation  so 
obtained  may  not  be  applicable  for  concrete 
of  another  grade  or  made  with  different  types  of 
materials. 

7.4  The  dynamic  Young's  modulus  of  elasticity 
(E)  of  the  concrete  may  be  determined  from 
the  pulse  velocity  and  the  dynamic  Poisson's 
ratio  (fjt),  using  the  following  relationship: 

E  =  P  (  l  +  /i)  (l-2/*)ya 
l-/i 

where 

E  =  dynamic  Young's  Modulus  of  elasticity 
inMPa 

p  =  density  in  kg/m',  and 

V  =  pulse  velocity  in  m/second. 

The  above  relationship  may  be  expressed  as: 

£=?/  (m)  y 
where 


1— /i 


The  value  of  the  dynamic  Poisson's  ratio  varies 
from  0-20  to  0-35,  with  0-24  as  average.  However, 
it  is  desirable  to  have  an  independent  measure  of 
it  for  the  particular  type  of  concrete  under  test. 
The  dynamic  Poisson's  ratio  may  be  obtained 
from  measurements  on  concrete  test-beams 
of  the  pulse  velocity  (  K )  alongwith  length  (  / ) 
of  the  beam  and  the  fundamental  resonant 
frequency  (n)  of  the  beam  in  longitudinal 
mode  of  vibration.  From  these  measurements, 
the  factor /(  ^  )  is  calculated  by  the  relation: 


where 

n  =  fundamental     resonant    frequency 
cycles  per  second,  and 

/  =  length  of  specimen  in  m. 


m 


15 13311  (  Part  1 } :  1992 


ANNEX    A 
(  Foreword ) 
Cement  and  Concrete  Sectional  Committee,  CED  2 


Representing 
In  personal  capacity  (  University  of  Roorkee,  Roorkee  347667  ) 

B.  G.  Shirke  &  Co,  Pune 

Orissa  Cement  Limited,  New  Delhi 

The  Associated  Cement  Companies  Ltd,  Bombay 

Central  Public  Works  Department,  New  Delhi 
Sardar  Sarovar  Narmada  Nigam  Ltd,  Gandhinagar 
Irrigation  and  Power  Research  Institute,  Amritsar 

A.  P.  Engineering  Research  Laboratories,  Hyderabad 
Central  Water  Commission,  New  Delhi 

Hyderabad  Industries  Limited,  Hyderabad 

Structural  Engineering  Research  Centre  (  CSIR  ),  Ghaziabad 
The  India  Cements  Limited,  Madras 

Gannon  Dunkerley  &  Company  Limited,  Bombay 
Central  Building  Research  Institute  (  CSIR  ),  Roorkee 


Ctiairman 

Dr  H.  C.  Visvesvaraya 

Members 

Shri  B.  R.  Bhartikar 

Shri  U.  N.  Rath  C  Alternate  ) 

Shri  H.  Bhattacharya 

Dr  A.  K.  Chatterjee 

Shri  S.  H.  Subramanian  (  Alternate  ) 
Chiep  Engineer  (  Designs  ) 

Superintending  Engineer  (  S  &  S  ) 
(  Alternate  ) 

Chief  Engineer,  Navagam  Dam 
Superintendino  Engineer,  QCC 
(  Alternate  ) 

Chief  Engineer  (  Research-cum- 

DlRECTOR  ) 

Research  Officer  (  Concrete 
Technology  )  (  Alternate  ) 

Director 

Joint  Director  (  Alternate  ) 
Director  (  CMDD  )(N&W) 

Deputy  Director  (  CMDD  ) 
(  NW  &  S  )  (  Alternate  ) 

Shri  K.  H.  Ganowal 

Shri  V.  Pattabhi  (  Alternate  ) 

Shri  V.  K.  Ghanekar 

Shri  S,  Gopinath 

Shri  R.  TaMilakaran  (  Alternate  ) 

Shri  S.  K.  Guha  Thakurta 

Shri  S.  P,  Shankaranarayanan 
(  Alternate  ) 

Dr  Irshad  Masood 

Dr  Md  Khalid  (  Alternate  ) 

Joint  Director,  Standards  (  B  &  S  )  (CB-I)      Research,    Designs   and  Standards  Organization  (  Ministry  of 

Railways  ),  Lucknow 
Joint  Director  Standards  (  B  &  S  )/ 
(  CB-II  )  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  N.  G.  Joshi 

Shri  P.  D.  Kelkar  (  Alternate  ) 

Shri  D.  K.  Kanunoo 

Shri  B.  R.  Meena  (  Alternate  ) 

Shri  P.  Krishnamurthy 

Shri  S.  Chakravarthy  (  Alternate  ) 

Shri  A.  K.  Lal 

Shri  T.  R.  Bhatia  (  Alternate  ) 

Shri  G.  K.  Majumdar 


Shri  S.  O.  Rangari  (  Alternate  ) 
ShrJ  M.  K.  Mdkheiuee 

Shri  M.  K.  Ghosh  (  Alternate  ) 

Shri  P.  N.  Mehta 

Shri  J.  S.  Sanqaneria  (  Alternate  ) 
Member  Secretary 

Director  (  Civil  )  (  Alternate  ) 

Shri  Nirmal  Singh 

Shri  S.  S.  Miglani  (  Alternate  ) 


Indian  Hume  Pipes  Co  Limited,  Bombay 

National  Test  House,  Calcutta 

Larsen  and  Toubro  Limited,  Bombay 

National  Buildings  Organization,  New  Delhi 

Hospital    Services     Consultancy     Corporation    (  India )  Ltd, 
New  Delhi 

Roads  Wing.  Department  of  Surface  Transport    (  Ministry  of 
Transport ),  New  Delhi 

Geological  Survey  of  India,  Calcutta 

Central  Board  of  Irrigation  and  Power,  New  Delhi 

Development  Commissioner  for  Cement    Industry  (  Ministry  of 
Industry  ) 


IS  13311  ( ParU  )  :  1992 

Members 

Shri  R.  C.  Parate 

Col  R.  K.  Singh  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  H.  S.  Pasricha 

Shri  Y.  R.  Phull 

Shri  S.  S.  Seehra  (  Alternaie  ) 

Shri  Y.  R.  Phull 

Shri  R.  H.  SharMa  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  C.  Raikumar 

Dr  S.  C.  Ahluwaua  (  Alternate  ) 

Shri  O.  Ramdas 

Shri  R.C.  Sharma  (  Alternate  ) 

Dr  M.  Ramaiah 

Dr  a.  G.  Madkava  Rao  (  Alternate  ) 

Representativb 

Shri  A.  U.  Ruhsingkani 

Shri  C.  S.  Sharma  (  Alternate ) 

Shri  T.  N.  Subba  Rao 

Shri  S.  A.  Reddi  (  Alternate  ) 

SuFT  Engineer  (  Designs  ) 

EXECtrrivE  Engineer  (  SM.R.  Division  ) 
(  Alternate  ) 
Shri  S.  B.  Suri 

Shri  N.'Chandrasekaran  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  H.  C.  Visvesvaraya 

Shri  D.  C.  Chaturvedi  (  Alternate  ) 

Shri  G.  Raman, 
Director  (  Civil  Engg  ) 


Representing 
Engineer-in-Chiers  Branch,  Army  Headquarters 

Hindustan  Prefab  Ltd,  New  Delhi 

Central  Road  Research  Institute  (  CSIR  ),  New  Delhi 

Indian  Roads  Congress,  New  Delhi 

National  Council  for  Cement  and  Building  Materials,  New  Delhi 

Directorate  General  of  Supplies  and  Disposals,  New  Delhi 

Structural  Engineering  Research  Centre  (  CSIR  ),  Madras 

Builders  Association  of  India,  Bombay 
Cement  Corporation  of  India,  New  Delhi 

Gammon  India  Limited,  Bombay 

Public  Works  Department,  Government  of  Tamil  Nadu 

Central  Soil  and  Materials  Research  Station.  New  Delhi 
The  Institution  of  Engineers  (  India  ),  Calcutta 
Director  General,  BIS  (  Ex-offieio  Member  ) 


Secretary 

Shri  N.  C.  Bandyopadhyay 

Joint  Director  (  Civil  Engg  ),  BIS 


Concrete  Subcommittee*  CED  2  :  2 


Convener 

Dr  a.  K.  Mullick 

Members 

Shri  C.  R.  Alimchandani 

Shri  S.  Rangarajan  (  Alternate  ) 

Dr  p.  C.  Chowdhury 

Dr  C.  S.  Viswanatha  (  Alternate  ) 

Deputy  Director  (  EH  ) 

Assistant  Director  (  EH  )  (  Alternate  ) 

I>IRECTOR  (  C  &  MDD  ) 

Deputy  Director  (  Alternate  ) 

Director 

Joint  Director  (  Alternate  ) 

Shri  V,  K.  Ghanekar 

Shri  D.  S.  Prakash  Rao  (  Alternate  ) 

Shri  B.  S,  Gupta 

Shri  S.  K.  Guha  Thakurta 

Shri  S.P.  Sankarnarayanan  (  Alternate  ) 

Shri  G.  R.  Haridas 

Shri  N.  Prabhakar  {^Alternate  ) 

Shri  J.  S.  Hinoorani 

Shri  A.  P.  Remedios  (  Alternate  ) 

Shri  Lalfi  Kumar  Jain 


National  Council  for  Cement  and  Building  Materials,  New  Delhi 

Stup  Consultants  Limited,  Bombay 

Torsteel  Research  Foundation  in  India,  Calcutta 

National  Buildings  Organization.  New  Delhi 

Central  Water  Commission,  New  Delhi 

A.  P.  Engineering  Research  Laboratories,  Hyderabad 

Structural  Engineering  Research  Centre  (  CSIR  ).  Ghaziabad 

Central  Building  Research  Institute  (  CSIR  ),  Roorkee 
Gannon  Dunkerley  &  Company  Limited,  Bombay 

Gammon  India  Limited,  Bombay 

Associated  Consulting  Services,  Bombay 

In  personal  capacity  (  36  Sneh  Nagar,  Wardha  Road,  Nagpur  IS  ) 


IS  13311  (Parti  )  .1992 


Joint  Director  Standards  (  B  &  S  )/(CB-I) 
Joint  Director.  Standards  (  B  &  S  )/ 
(  CB-II  )  (  Alternate  ) 

Shri  K.  C.  Karamchandani 

Shri  N.  K.  Gupta  {Alternate  ) 

Prof  S.  Krishnamoorthy 

Shri  K.  K.  Nayar  {Alternate  ) 

Shri  V.  M,  Madge 

Shri  S.  B.  Malekar  (Alternate  ) 
Dr  S.  C.  Maiti 

Managing  Director 

Shri  M.  Kundu  (  Alternate  ) 

Shri  N.  V.  Merani 

Shri  M.  K.  Mukherjee 

Shri  N.  K.  Sinha  (  Alternate  ) 

Shri  B,  V.  B.  Pai 

Shri  A,  D,  Ketkar  (  Alternate  ) 

Shri  Y.  H.  Phull 

Shri  S.  S.  Seehra  (  Alternate  ) 

Shri  A.  S.  Prasada  Rao 

Shri  K.  Mani  (  Alternate  ) 

Superintending  Engineer  (  Designs  ) 
Executive  Engineer  (  Designs  )  III 
(  Alternate  ) 

Shri  B.  T.  Un walla 

Brig  (Dr)  S.  G.  Vombatkare 

Shri  N.  K.  Bhattacharya  (  Alternate  ) 


Research,    Designs   and  Standards  Organization    (  Ministry  of 
Railways  ),  Lucknow 

Engineers  India  Limited,  New  Delhi 

Indian  Institute  of  Technology.  New  Delhi 

The  Hindustan  Construction  Co  Ltd,  Bombay 

National  Council  for  Cement  and  Building  Materials,  New  Delhi 
Hindustan  Prefab  Limited,  New  Delhi 

Public  Works  Department,  Bombay 

Ministry  of  Transport  (  Roads  Wing  ),  New  Delhi 

The  Associated  Cement  Companies  Limited,  Bombay 

Central  Road  Research  Institute,  New  Delhi 

Structural  Engineering  Research  Centre  (  CSIR  ),  Madras 

Central  Public  Works  Department,  New  Delhi 

In    personal     capacity    ( 1519,    Rustom  .  Baut,    Victoria  Road, 
Bombay  27) 

Engineer-in-Chief's  Branch,  Army  Headquarters,  New  Delhi 


(  Continued  from  second  Cover  ) 

Inmost  of  the  situations,  the  records  of  the  original  materials  or  mix  proportions  used  in  the 
structure  are  not  available.  Therefore,  considerable  improvisation  has  to  be  done  in  evolving 
the  testing  scheme  and  use  is  made  of  comparative  measurements  made  on  adjoining  portions  of 
the  structure  or  even  other  structures  in  the  vicinity  of  the  one  in  question.  In  doing  so,  an 
approach  is  taken  that  if  the  same  materials  and  similar  mix  proportions  and  level  of  workman- 
ship were  employed  for  the  two  situations,  any  significant  difference  in  the  ultrasonic 
pulse  velocity  or  rebound  indices  between  them  must  be  due  to  some  inherent  differences  in  the 
overall  quality.  If  the  nominal  grades  of  concrete  or  mix  proportions  are  known  to  be  different 
in  either  case,  suitable  allowance  is  made  for  the  same  in  interpretation  of  results. 

The  test  results  on  ultrasonic  pulse  velocity  and  rebound  indices  -are  analysed  statistically  and 
plotted  as  histograms  and  the  lower  fractiles  of  results  are  taken  for  assessing  the  quality,  or 
•characteristic'  strength  of  concrete,  in  line  with  the  current  limit  state  concepts  of  design. 

The  composition  of  the  technical  committee  responsible  for  the  formulation  of  this  standard  is 
given  in  Annex  A. 

For  the  purpose  of  deciding  whether  a  particular  requirement  of  this  standard  is  complied  with, 
the  final  value,  observed  or  calculated,  expressing  the  result  of  a  test  or  analysis,  shall  be  rounded 
off  in  accordance  with  IS  2  :  1960  <Rules  for  rounding  off  numerical  values  (  revised)'.  The  number 
of  significant  places  retained  in  the  rounded  off  value  should  be  the  same  as  that  of  the  specified 
value  in  this  standard. 


Bureau  of  Indian  Standards 

BIS  is  a  statutory  institution  established  under  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  Act,  1986  to  promote 
harmonious  development  of  the  activities  of  standardization,  marking  and  quality  certification  of  goods 
and  attending  to  connected  matters  in  the  country. 

Copyright 

BIS  has  the  copyright  of  all  its  publications.  No  part  of  these  publications  may  be  reproduced  in  any  form 
without  the  prior  permission  in  writing  of  BIS.  This  does  not  preclude  the  free  use,  in  the  course  of 
implementing  the  standard,  of  necessary  details,  such  as  symbols  and  sizes,  type  or  grade  designations. 
Enquiries  relating  to  copyright  be  addressed  to  the  Director  (Publications),  BIS. 

Review  of  Indian  Standards 

Amendments  are  issued  to  standards  as  the  need  arises  on  the  basis  of  comments.  Standards  are  also 
reviewed  periodically;  a  standard  along  with  amendments  is  reaffirmed  when  such  review  indicates  that 
ho  changes  are  needed;  if  the  review  indicates  that  changes  are  needed,  it  is  taken  up  for  revision.  Users 
of  Indian  Standards  should  ascertain  that  they  are  in  possession  of  the  latest  amendments  or  edition  by 
referring  to  the  latest  issue  of  'BIS  Handbook'  and  'Standards  Monthly  Additions'. 

This  Indian  Standard  has  been  developed  from  Doc :  No.  CED  2  (  3889  ) 


Amendments  Issued  Since  Publication 


Amend  No. 


Date  of  Issue 


Text  Affected 


BUREAU  OF  INDIAN  STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg,  New  Delhi  110002 
Telephones  :  323  01  31, 323  83  75,  323  94  02 

Regional  Offices  : 

Central    :  Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg 
NEW  DELHI  110002 

Eastern    :  1/14  C.  I.T.  Scheme  VII  M,  V.  I.  P.  Road,  Maniktola 
CALCUTTA  700054 

Northern  :  SCO  335-336,  Sector  34-A,  CHANDIGARH  160022 
Southern  :  C.  1.  T.  Campus,  IV  Cross  Road,  MADRAS  600113 


Western  :  Manakalaya,  E9  MIDC,  Marol,  Andheri  (East) 
MUMBAI  400093 


Telegrams :  Manaksanstha 
(Common  to  all  offices) 


Telephone 


{ 


323  76  17 
323  38  41 


r  337  84  99, 337  85  61 
\  337  86  26, 337  91  20 


{ 


60  38  43 

60  20  25 


r  235  02  16,  235  04  42 
\  235  15  19, 235  23  15 

/  832  92  95, 832  78  58 
\  832  78  91,  832  78  92 


Branches  :  AHMADABAD.      BANGALORE.         BHOPAL.  BHUBANESHWAR. 

COIMBATORE.  FARIDABAD.  GHAZIABAD.  GUWAHATl.  HYDERABAD. 
JAIPUR.    KANPUR.    LUCKNOW.    PATNA.    THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 


Printed  at  Dee  Kay  Printers,  New  Delhi- 1 10015,  India. 


