**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 10584-2 (1983): Glass marking pencils, Part 2: With 
spiral paper-form casing [CHD 14: Printing, Inks, 
Stationary and Allied Products] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 10584 (Pari 2) - 1983 

( Reaffirmed 2004 ) 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
GLASS-MARKING PENCILS 

PART 2 WITH SPIRAL PAPER-FORM CASING 



UDG ti77'T>6 r > r 666' I -777 




® Copyright IMR3 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAK 111 IS VAN, 9 BAHADUR SHaH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110003 



Gr 3 



S/pUmhtr 1983 



IS : 10584 ( Part 2 ) - 1983 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
GLASS-MARKING PENCILS 

PART 2 WITH SPIRAL PAPER-FORM CASING 



Pencils Sectional Committee, GPDG 8 

Chairman Representing 

Shri H. Mitra Government of India Stationery Office, Calcutta 

Members 

Shri N. G. Basak Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Shri B. Bose ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. N. Bhargava Indian Bureau of Mines, Nagpur 

Shri R. D. Naik ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. Biswas Tire Bharat Carbon & Ribbon Mfg Co Ltd, 

New Delhi 
Shri A. K, Sengupta ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. D. Dandekar Camlin Private Ltd, Bombay 

Shri D. D. Dandekar ( Alternate ) 
Director, Map Publication Survey of India, Dehra Dun 

Officer-iN-Charge ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. G. Ghanekar Office of the Development Commissioner, Small 

Scale Industries, New Delhi 
Shri P. K. Ghose National Council of Educational Research & 

Training, New Delhi 
Shrt Kuldip Chand Jain Lion Pencils Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shri Rajendra Bhushan 
Jain ( Alternate ) 
Shri Nripraj Jain Indian Pencil Manufacturers' Association, Bombay 

Shri V. S. Narang ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. MohaNty Directorate General of Posts & Telegraphs, 

New Delhi 
Dr K. S. NarASimhan Regional Research Laboratory ( CSIR ), 

Bhubaneshwar 
Shri Nirmal Singh Delhi Stationers Association ( Regd ), Delhi 



Shri Ravinder Kumar 
Khanna ( Alternate ) 



( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1983 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be ah infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 10584 ( Part 2 ) - 1983 

( Continued from page \ ) 

Members Representing 

Oitficer-in-C h a r g e, Forest Research Institute & Colleges, Dehra Dun 

Wood Seasoning Branch 
Shri K. G. Purang Associated Instrument Manufacturers ( India ) 

Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 
Shri M. D. Nair ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. Radhapathy The Madras Pencil Factory, Madras 

Shri V. Swaroof ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. J. Sanghvi Stationery & Office Equipment Association of India, 

Calcutta 
Shri H. B. Sanghvi Hindustan Pencils Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shri D. M. Lal Srivastava ( Alternate ) 
Dr A. S. Sethi, Director General, ISI ( Ex-qfficio Member ) 

Director ( Consr Prod & Med 
Instrs ) 

Secretary 

Shri J. P. Mehta 
Deputy Director ( Consr Prod & Med Instrs ), ISI 



IS : 10584 ( Part 2 )- 1983 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
GLASS-MARKING PENCILS 

PART 2 WITH SPIRAL PAPER-FORM CASING 
0. FOREWORD 

0,1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 12 May 1983, after the draft finalized by Pencils Sectional 
Committee had been approved by the Consumer Products and Medical 
Instruments Division Council. 

0.2 This standard contains clauses which call for agreement between the 
purchaser andthe supplier and which permit the purchaser to use his 
option for selection to suit his requirements. The relevant clauses are 2.2, 
7.1 and 8.2. 

0.3 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, ex- 
pressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded ofTin accordance 
with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in 
the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value 
in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard covers the requirements and methods of tests for 
pencils with spiral paper-form casing for marking on glossy-surface 
materials. 

2. TYPE AND COLOUR 

2.1 Types — The pencil shall be of two types depending upon diameter 
of slip ( see also 5,3 ). 

Type I 4*6 to 5'0 mm 
Type II 3-6 to 4'0 mm 



*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 

3 



IS : 10584 ( Part 2 ) - 1983 

2.2 Colours — As agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier the 
pencil and slip shall be any of the following colours: 



Black 


Green 


Red 


Blue 


Orange 


White 


Brown 


Purple 


Yellow 



3. MATERIALS 

3.1 Slip — The slip shall be a mixture of wax, extender and pigments 
compounded to meet the requirements of this specification. 

3.2 Casing — Slips shall be spirally wrapped with at least seventeen 
layers of paper. The wrapping shall be scored suitably at intervals of 
5 mm to permit easy removal as slip is consumed. Each interval shall be 
provided with an indention or other suitable method for easily starting 
the process of removing the paper. 

4. WORKMANSHIP AND FINISH 

4.1 The slip shall be in one piece of uniform grading and uniform 
colour. It shall mark easily on smooth surfaces without crumbling or 
slipping. 

4.2 The pencil shall be free from irregularities, twisting, or other defects 
and shall be properly finished. The casing shall be uniform thickness 
and co-axial with the slip. The ends shall be at right angles to the length 
of the pencil. The outer surface of the pencil shall reasonably represent 
the colour of the slip. The pencil shall be finished in accordance with 
standard trade practice. 

5. SHAPES AND DIMENSIONS 

5.1 Shape — The pencils shall be manufactured into circular in cross- 
section. 

5.2 Length of Pencils — The length of pencils shall be 180 ± 3 
mm, 

5.3 Diameter of Slip — The diameter of slip of pencil shall be as 
under: 

a) Type I 4*6 to 5*0 mm, and 

b) Type II 3*6 to 4'0 mm. 

5.4 The diameter of pencils shall be between 9'0 and 10*0 mm. 



IS : 10584 ( Part 2 ) - 1983 

6. TESTS 

6.1 Dimension — For measurement of length, effective length of the 
slip should be measured. For measurement of slip-diameter the slip shall 
be taken out of the casing. Diameter of slip may also be measured 
before being wrapped with papers. 

6.2 Eccentricity of Slip with the Casing — Slip shall not show an 
eccentricity of more than 0'3 mm with the casing when measured by the 
method described in Appendix A. 

6.3 Legibility and Stability — Six 10 mm high letters and numbers 
shall be inscribed on the side of a glass beaker with a sample pencil. The 
beaker shall be placed in an oven at a temperature of 60 ± 2°C for a 
period of one hour. The beaker shall then be removed and allowed to 
cool down to room temperature. Marking shall be clearly legible with 
little or no colour change. 

6.4 Marking Characteristics — The same pencil used in the preced- 
ing test shall be tested for writing on the following glossy surface 
materials: 

Aluminium, callophane, PVG and HD polyethene sheet and glazed 
white porcelain. Straight line and zig-zag lines consisting of short 
straight lines forming sharp angles shall be drawn on each of the speci- 
fied materials. Markings shall then be examined. Markings shall be 
continuous, clearly visible, distinct and sharp, free from chips and 
crumbs, except that a slight break in continuity of markings at any angle 
will be permitted. 

6.5 Water-Soluble Matter of Slip — When tested in accordance with 
the procedure given under Appendix B, this shall not exceed 1*25 percent 
by weight. 

6S Breaking -Strength of Slip — The slip shall have a breaking 
strength of not less than 2*0 kg for Type I pencils and 1'4 kg for Type II 
pencils when tested in accordance with Appendix G. 

7. SAMPLING 

7.1 Sampling and acceptance criteria shall be as agreed to between the 
purchaser and the supplier. A recommended scheme for the same is 
given in Appendix D. 

8. MARKING AND PACKING 

8.1 Each pencil shall be marked with: 

a) the name and trade-mark of the manufacturer, 

b) type and colour of the pencil, and 

c) other indication which may be specified by the purchaser. 

5 



IS : 10584 ( Part 2 )- 1983 

8.1.1 Pencils may also be marked with the ISI Certification Mark, 

Note — The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the 
Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and Regu- 
lations made thereunder. The ISI Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard 
conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the require- 
ments of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality 
control which is devised and supervised by ISI and operated by the producer, ISI 
marked products are also continuously checked by ISI for conformity to that 
standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions, under which a licence for the 
use of the ISI Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors 
may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution. 

8.2 Twelve or any number of pencils of the same colour and type as 
agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier shall be packed in a 
paper-board open-end sleeve, clear plastics tray or other suitable 
container bearing the name or trade-mark of the manufacturer, type and 
colour of the pencils, and month and year of packing of the pencils. 
Twelve such packets shall be packed in a cardboard or plastic box. 
Each such box shall be marked to indicate the type, colour, month and 
year of packing of the pencils and also the name or trade-mark of the 
manufacturer. 



APPENDIX A 

( Clause 6.2 ) 
ECCENTRICITY OF SLIP WITH THE CASINGS 

A-l. PROCEDURE 

A-l.l The pencil shall be prepared so that the normal circular, 
unsharpened portion of the slip extends 15 mm from the casing at both 
the ends. 

A-1.2 Place the two exposed portions of the slip on two suitable smooth 
semi-circular vertical notches suitably adjusted to be in the same horizon- 
tal axis as that of the sample pencil so that the pencil may be made to 
rotate freely round its own axis, while exposed slip-ends rest on two 
notches. 

A-1.3 Choose a suitable point on the surface of the casing such that it is 
approximately 20 mm inside the casing from one end. Take the reading 
of a dial-gauge by placing its needle vertically on the point. Give the 
pencil a rotation of about 60° and take the second reading of the dial- 
gauge. Take six such readings by giving the pencil a rotation of 60° 
successively. The readings may now be compared to obtain the eccentri- 
city of the slip with the casing. 



IS : 10584 ( Part 2 ) - 1983 

A-1.4 Reverse the ends of the pencil and take second set of readings as 
described in A-1.3. 



APPENDIX B 

( Clauses 6.5 and D-2.4 ) 

WATER SOLUBLE MATTER OF SLIP 

B-l. Weigh accurately about 5 g of the material and boil with 200 ml of 
water for 5 minutes. Make up the volume to 250 ml with water. Filter 
the solution. 

B-Ll Reject the first 50 ml of the filtrate. Take an aliquot portion 
( say V ml ) from the remaining solution and evaporate to dryness on a 
water-bath. Dry the residue to constant weight in an air-oven maintained 
at 150 ± 1°C. 

B-l, 2 Calculate as under: 

w ♦ i ui *♦ 25 x C x 100 

Water soluble matter ==*= yttxt 

VW 

where 

C « constant weight in g of the residue, 

V = volume in ml of the solution taken for the test, and 

W = weight in g of the material taken for the test. 

Note — Distilled water conforming to IS : 1070-1977* shall be used for this test. 



APPENDIX C 

[ Clause 6.6 ) 
BREAKING STRENGTH OF SLIP 

C-l. The apparatus used in the test is shown in Fig. 1. 

C-2. PROCEDURE 

C-2.1 Pencils shall be prepared so that unsharpened tip of the slip extends 
5 to 6 mm from the casing. 



♦Specification for water for general laboratory use ( second revision ). 

7 



IS : 10584 ( Part 2 ) - 1983 




WEIGHT PAN 



PENCIL 



GLASS PLATE 



WOODEN STOOL 



Fig. 1 Apparatus for Testing Breaking Strength -of Slip 

C-2.2 Fix the pencil firmly at a distance of 35 to 40 mm from the'exposed 
end of slip in a clamp such a way that the pencil remains at an%ngle of 
45° to the horizontal smooth glass plate. 

C-2.3 Add weights gradually on the top of the clamp. Find the load at 
which the slip breaks. 

C-2.4 Repeat the test at four different places on the pencil and find the 
average breaking load of the slip. 



IS : 10584 ( Part 2 ) - 1983 

APPENDIX D 

( Clause 7.1 ) 

SAMPLING AND CRITERIA FOR CONFORMITY OF GLASS 
MARKING PENCILS WITH SPIRAL PAPER-FORM CASING 

D-l. LOT 

D-l.l In any consignment all the packets of pencils of same type and 
colour manufactured during the same period under similar conditions 
shall be grouped together to constitute a lot. 

D-l. 2 Number of pencils to be selected from each lot shall depend upon 
the size of the lot and shall be in accordance with col 1 and 2 of 
Table 1. 



TABLE 1 SAMPLE SIZE AND CRITERIA FOR CONFORMITY 


Lot Size 

, -*- , 

No. of 
Packets 


Sample^Size 
, * , 

No. of No. of 
Packets Pencils 


» Fob Dimensions 
Eccentricity of ! 

.. -K. 


AND 

Slip 


Fob Legibility and 
Stability, Marking 
Chabactebistics and 
Breaking Stbength 
of Pencils 


Sample 
Size 


Acceptance 

No. 














Sample Size 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


(5) 




(6) 


Up to 25 


2 


7 


5 







2 


26 to 50 


3 


11 


8 







3 


51 to 150 


5 


18 


13 







5 


151 & above 


7 


28 


20 


1 




8 



D-l.2.1 These pencils shall be selected from the lot at random and to 
ensure the randomness of selection, procedure given in IS : 4905-1968* 
may be followed. 

D-2- NUMBER OF TESTS AND CRITERIA FOR CONFORMITY 

D-2.1 The pencils selected at random in accordance with col 3 of 
Table 1 shall be divided into two parts in accordance with col 4 and 6 
of Table 1. 



* Methods for random sampling. 



IS : 10584 ( Part 2 ) - 1983 

D-2.2 The pencils selected in accordance with col 4 of Table 1 shall be 
subjected to test for dimensions ( see 6.1 ), and eccentricity of slip with 
the casing ( see 6.2 ). A lot shall be considered as conforming to these 
requirements if the number of defectives found in the sample is less than 
or equal to corresponding permissible number of defectives as given in 
col 5 of Table 1. 

D-2.3 The pencils selected from the sample in accordance with col 6 of 
Table 1 shall be examined for legibility and stability {see 6.3), marking 
characteristics ( see 6.4 ). If none of the pencils in the sample fails in 
these tests the number of pencils shall be tested for breaking strength of 
slip ( see 6.6 ). If all the pencils pass, the lot shall be considered as 
conforming to this test. 

D-2.4 If the lot is conforming to all the requirements as mentioned in 
D-2.2 and D-2.3, the test for water soluble matter of slip ( see 6.5 ) shall 
be carried out as given in Appendix B. If the sample passes, the lot shall 
be considered as conforming to this test. 

D-2.5 The lot shall be accepted if D-2.2, D-2.3 and D-2.4 are satisfied, 
otherwise rejected. 



10 



