•••••**••*•**•*• 



i&Sz 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
'The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
r Step Out From the Old to the New' 



IS 6103 (1971) : Method of test for specific resistance 
(resistivity) of electrical insulating liquids [ETD 3: 
Fluids for Electrotechnical Applications] 



j*rfiiii^AK>fe ¥i # mj^wafearoASiiTFS 



ZS&W I • ^SS>^^N&^> 



>^XVVfeV£ 




• 




Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge" 



?TR rr^ fnj\ <sMMI | Wf ^ft ^TPTT ^f W ^RTT "f 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 



^ *2*~* 





5> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS6103:1971 

Indian Standard ( Reaffirmed 2001 > 

METHOD OF TEST FOR 

SPECIFIC RESISTANCE ( RESISTIVITY ) OF 

ELECTRICAL INSULATING LIQUIDS 

( Fifth Reprint AUGUST 1996 ) 
UDC 621.315.615 ; 621.3 17.332.3 



© Copyright 1972 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MA£G 

NEW DELHI 110002 

Gr 5 April 1972 



isiUM.im 
Indian Standard 

METHOD OF TEST FOR 

SPEGTFIC RESISTANCE ( RESISTIVITY ) OF 

ELECTRICAL INSULATING LIQUIDS 

Insulating Materials Sectional Committee, ETDG 18 

Chairman Representing 

Shri A. S. Lakshmanan Senapathy Whiteley Pvt Ltd, Bangalore 

Membtrs 

Shri B. A. Govindara j ( Alternate to 
Shri A. S. Lakshmanan ) 
Da A. S. Bhaduri National. Test House, Calcutta 

Shri S. K. Mukherjeb ( Alternate ) 
Shri C. E. Bhaskar Rao Bharat Bijlee Ltd, Bombay 

Shri S. G. Deshmukh ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. P. Bhatia Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, Newi 

Delhi 
Shri G. R. Bhatia ( Alternate ) 
Director, Central Power Central Water & Power Commission ( Power Wing ) 
Research Institute New Delhi 

DbpXjty Director, Central 
Power Research Institute ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. Doraiswamy Dr Beck & Co ( India ) Ltd, Poona 

Shri S. B. Bapat ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. D. Erandk Hindustan Brown Boveri Ltd, Bombay 

Shri A. S. Bendre { Alternate ) 
Shri S. N. Gandhi Permali Wallace Ltd, Bhopal 

Shri C. C. Sakarda (Alternate ) 
Dr H. V, Gofalakrishna Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 

Shri P. N. Hiriyannaiah Kirloskar Electric Co Ltd, Bangalore 

Dr B. N. J ay aram (Alternate) 
Shri T. R. Krishna Gowda NGEF Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri S, Shivananda Swamy ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. R. MahaJAn Indian Electrical Manwacturers' Association, 

Bombay 
Shri G. H. Rodrioks ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI U0002 



IS 16103 -1971 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri M. K. Majumdar Heavy Electricals ( India ) Ltd, Bhopal 

Shri jCf . V. Dalai. ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. L. Pradhan Jyoti Ltd, Baroda 

Shri D. K, Kulkarni ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. R. Ramachandran Power Cables Private Ltd, Bombay 

Shri P. N. Patel ( Alternate) 
Shri V. S. Rao Directorate of Standardization ( DGI ) ( Ministry of 

Defence ), New'Delhi 

Shri Sat Dev ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. Sengupta Formica India Ltd, Poona 

Shri R. B. F. Rosario { Alternate ) 
Shri R. K. Tandan National Physical Laboratory (CSIR ), New Delhi 

Shri Y. S. Venkateswaran, Director General, ISI ( Ex-ojjicio Member ) 

Director ( Elec tech ) ( Secretary ) 



18:6103-1971 

Indian Standard 

METHOD OF TEST FOR 

SPECIFIC RESISTANCE ( RESISTIVITY ) OF 

ELECTRICAL INSULATING LIQUIDS 

Q. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 28 December 1971, after the draft finalized by the Insulating 
Materials Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical 
Division Council. 

0,2 For the purpose of determining the characteristics of electrical insulat- 
ing materials particularly insulating liquids, many test methods have to be 
evolved and the present standard covers the method of test for specific 
resistance of electrical insulating liquids. 

0.3 In preparing this standard, assistance has been derived from ASTM 
Designation D 1169-64 'Standard method of test for specific resistance 
( resistivity ) of electrical insulating liquids', issued by the American Society 
for Testing and Materials. 

0.4 In reporting the result of a test made in accordance with this standard, 
if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be 
done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes the method for the determination of specific 
resistance ( resistivity ) applied to new electrical insulating liquids, as well 
as to liquids in service, or subsequent to service, in cables, transformers, 
circuit-breakers, and other electrical apparatus. 

1.2 This method covers a procedure for making referee tests with dc 

potential. 

1.3 When it is desired to make routine determinations requiring less 
iccuracy, certain modifications to this method are permitted as described 
n 18 to 25. 

* Rules for rounding off numerical values ( rtoiud ). 

3 



1$ j 61 03 -1971 

2. SIGNIFICANCE 

2.1 The resistivity of a liquid is a measure of its electrical insulating 
properties under conditions comparable to those of the test. High resistivity 
reflects low content of free ions and ion-forming particles, and normally 
indicates a low concentration of conductive contaminants. 

3. DEFINITION 

3.1 The specific resistance {resistivity) in ohm-centimetres of a liquid, is the 
ratio of the dc potential gradient in volts per centimetre paralleling the 
current flow within the specimen, to the current density in amperes per 
square centimetre at a given instant of time and under prescribed conditions. 
This is numerically equal to the resistance between opposite faces of a 
centimetre cube of the liquid. 

4. GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 

4.1 Where both the power factor and resistivity measurements are to be 
made consecutively on the same specimen, the power factor test shall always 
be made before applying the dc potential to the specimen, and the cell 
electrodes shall be short-circuited for one minute immediately prior to 
making' the resistivity measurements. 

4.2 Referee tests for resistivity shall be made in an atmosphere of less than 
50 percent relative humidity. For repea table results, these tests should be 
made under carefully controlled atmospheric conditions. 

4.3 Aside from the adverse influence of contamination on results of the 
resistivity test, there are other factors that may contribute to variations in 
the test results as follows: 

a) The use of an instrument not having an adequate range for 
accurately measuring the currant flowing in the circuit (see 5 for 
two types of recommended instruments ) . 

b) When the time of electrification is not exactly the same for every 
test. Upon the application of voltage the current flowing through 
the specimen decreases asymptotically towards a limiting value. 
Variation in the time of electrification may result in appreciable 
variation in the test results. 

c ) Undue length of time required for the test specimen in the cell to 
attain the desired test temperature. This is one of the main sources 
of erroneous results. For optimum results the time to attain the test 
temperature should not exceed 20 minutes. 

d) Fluctuations in the test voltage. 



IS t 6103 -1971 

4.4 To eliminate solid particles and water present in the oil (as a result of 
transportation, etc ), the oil should be treated as follows: 

The oil is brought approximately to 90°G, then filtered hot under 
vacuum (267 kN/m*). The filter should be of sintered glass of 
porosity 4. 

The filterate is cooled in a dessicator and is used immediately to 
measure resistivity. 

4.4.1 The oil samples drawn from equipment in service should not be 

treated. 

5. INSTRUMENTATION 

5.1 In order to obtain the greatest precision when making this test, use the 
voltage-current method with the following instruments: 

a) Voltmeter — having an accuracy of 2 percent or better, operated in 
the upper one-third of its scale range for measuring the voltage 
supply. 

b) Current- Measuring Device — Any type of instrument having adequate 
sensitivity and precision and with a suitable range for measurement 
of a wide spread of currents encountered when making this test on 
new or used liquids will be satisfactory. For currents greater than 
IO- 9 A and Ayrton shunt and galvanometer having a sensitivity of 
50 p A (50 X 10" 12 A) per division has been found convenient and 
satisfactory. The galvanometer deflection shall be not less than 20 
divisions for the applicable Ayrton shunt ratio. For currents less 
than 10~ s A, an electronic picoammeter has been found suitable. 
In using this instrument, the multiplier selected shall be such as to 
give at least one-half full-scale deflection on the indicating 
ihstrument. 

c) Time- Measuring Device — accurate to 0*5 second, for measuring the 
time of electrification. 

d) Electric Cells — connected in series are recommended for the steady 
voltage source. 

6. TEST CIRCUIT 

6.1 A schematic diagram of the test circuit is shown in Fig. 1. 

6.2 The circuitry shall be so constructed that leakage is minimal. To this 
end the transfer switches shall be mounted on polystyrene insulation of 
sufficient thickness to minimize possible leakage. All soldered connections 
shall be made with low-thermal-emf solder using a soldering flux of resin 
and alcohol. 

Note — The use of ordinary solder and flux may result in spurious thermal emf'i 
which will cause erroneous indications. 



HIGH VOLTAGE 
UHF CABLE 3000V 



THERMOMETERS 
MEASURING IEAQ. 
GUARO ELECTRODE 



75-220*C 
90-1tO # C 



POLYSTYRENE MOUNTED 
TRANSFER SWITCHES 



i 



i 



ie 



U-. 







AYRTON SHUNT AND 
GALVANOMETER 



PERFORATED CERAMIC DISK 



Note 1 — For measurements of current less than 13" # A, replace galvanometer and shunt with picoammeter. 

Nots 2 — With the S.P.D.T. switch on C terminal- the galvanometer may be calibrated while the electrodes of the 
test cell are short-circuited. 

Fig. I Circuit Diagram and Connections with Complete Shielding for Measuring 
Specific Resistance (Resistivity) of Electrical Insulating Liquids 



as 

*• 

a 

3 



18:6103-1971 

6.3 The test circuit shall be completely shielded. Connections to the 
current-measuring instrument shall be made with shielded leads. Suitable 
high voltage shielded leads are recommended for connecting the high 
voltage electrode and measuring electrode of the test cell to the test 
circuit. 

7* GALVANOMETER CALIBRATION AND SENSITIVITY 

7.1 When a dc galvanometer is used to measure the current, it shall first 
be calibrated to ensure that it is properly balanced, that is, that the 
deflections on either side of zero are equal when the glavanometer is 
energized with 'direct* and * reverse' polarities of the test potential. 

Note- — Throughout this test method the terms 'direct polarity* and 'reverse' 
polarity * are used to indicate when the positive and negative potential leads 
respectively are connected to the outer electrode of the test cell. 

7.2 The galvanometer sensitivity G ti in amperes per division, is used in 
computing the resistivity and is derived from the following equation: 

n E S 

where 

E =« test voltage in volts, 

R = calibrating resistor in ohms, 

5 = shunt multiplying factor (ratio of galvanometer current to 
shunt current), and 

D -c galvanometer deflection in divisions. 

8. TEST CELLS 

8.1 The design of test cells that conform to the general requirements given 
in Appendix A are considered suitable for use in making these tests. 

8.2 Three types of guarded electrode test cells that conform to these 
requirements and found suitable for measuring the resistivity of insulating 
liquids are shown in Fig. 2, 3, and 4. In addition, a two-electrode cell 
suitable for making routine tests is shown in Fig. 5. These figures and a 
brief description of each cell is given in Appendix A. 

8.3 Because the configuration of the electrodes of these test cells is such that 
their effective area and the distance between them are difficult to measure, 
each test cell constant A", may be derived from the following equation: 

K^S-6 ttC= 11-30 
where 

K « test cell constant in centimetres, and 

C = capacitance, in picofarads of the electrode system with air 
as the dielectric. 



1$: 6103- 1971 

9. TEST CHAMBER 

9.1 When the tests are to be made above room temperature but below 
300°C, a forced-draft, thermostatically controlled oven shall be used as the 
test chamber. For tests at room temperature, the unenergized oven may be 
conveniently used as the test chamber. 

9.2 The test chamber shall be provided with an opening in the wall through 
which two lengths of suitable high voltage shielded cable will pass to make 
electrical connection from the measuring equipment and voltage source, 
respectively, to the test cell. A perforated ceramic plate or disk shall be 
used to insulate the test cell from the metal flooring of the oven if the floor- 
ing is not insulated from the oven. 

9.3 A cross-section view of the test chamber with a three-electrode test cell 
in place and with test cables connected is shown in Fig* 1. 

10. TEST TEMPERATURE 

10.1 The temperature at which a referee testis made shall be mutually 
agreed upon between the purchaser and the manufacturer. Resistivity 
measurements are made at many different temperature. For acceptance 
tests, it is generally made at a temperature of 90°C, while for routine testing, 
it is usually made at room temperature or 90°G. In some research investiga- 
tions, tests may be made at considerably higher temperature, while in other 
cases, particularly for tests on cable oils in service, tests may be made over 
a range of temperatures. 

11. TEST VOLTAGE 

11.1 The average electrical stress to which the specimen is subjected shall 
be not less than 200 V/mm nor more than 1 200 V/mm. The upper limit 
has been set with the purpose of avoiding possible ionization if higher 
stresses' were permitted. It is recommended that a supply voltage not, 
materially in excess of 500 V be used. For acceptance testing, the stress 
and time of electrification should be mutually agreed upon by the purchaser 
and the manufacturer. The time of electrification in general usage is 
one minute. 

12. SAMPLING 

12.1 Oils and askarels for use in this test shall be sampled in accordance 
with Indian Standard method of sampling for liquid dielectrics ( undei 
preparation). Samples for testing should preferably be obtained through 
a closed system. If exposed to atmospheric conditions, the sample 
shall be taken when the relative humidity is 50 percent or less. Some 
liquids, in certain applications, require special handling and processes in 
the sampling, and these will be found in the governing procedures. Such 
procedures should be consulted before samples are taken. 

Note — Until the standard under preparation is published, the matter shall be 
subject to agreement between the concerned parties. 



IS: 6103- 1971 

12.2 The quantity of the sample taken for this test shall be sufficient for at 
least three separate resistivity determinations. 

13. CONDITIONING 

13.1 The sample shall be stored in its original sealed container and shall be 
shielded from light. Some liquids, such as oils of petroleum origin, undergo 
changes when exposed to sunlight. The sealed container shall be allowed 
to stand undisturbed in the room in which the test is to be made for 
a sufficient period of time to permit the sample to attain room temperature 
before it is opened. 

14. STORING TEST CELL 

14.1 The test cell, when not in use, shall be cleaned and dried in 

accordance with 15 and allowed to remain in a dust-free cabinet until it is 

\ to be used, at which time it shall be cleaned again in accordance with 15. 

15. CLEANING TEST CELL 

15.1 The cleanliness of the test cell is of paramount importance when 
making resistivity measurements because of the inherent susceptibility of 
most insulating liquids to contaminating influences oi the most minute 
nature. For this reason, the cell shall be cleaned and dried immediately 
prior to making the test, and it is essential that the procedures and 
precautions outlined in 15.2 to 15.5 shall be strictly observed. 

15.2 Dismantle the cell completely and wash all the component parts 
thoroughly with a technical grade of either petroleum ether, hexane or 
petroleum, spirit of a boiling point lower than 90°C. Wash the component 
parts with a mild abrasive soap or detergent. Take care not to lay the 
electrodes on any surface. Rinse all parts thoroughly with hot tap water, 
then with cold tap water, followed by several rinsings with distilled water. 
Take extreme care during the washing and rinsing of the test cell shown 
in Fig. 2 (see P 16) to prevent any moisture from entering the thermometer 
well in the inner electrode. As a precaution against this eventuality, use 
a suitable stopper to plug this opening prior, to starting the cleaning 
operation. 

15.3 After the surfaces of the electrodes and guard have been washed, take 
care not to touch these surfaces during the rinsing or any other subsequent 
operation. 

15.4 Place the component parts of the test cell in an oven maintained at 
1 10°C for a period of not less than 60 minutes. Do not dry test cells made 
of monel at this elevated temperature for more than 90 minutes as 
oxidation will take place, causing erroneous results. Take care to place the 
component parts of the cell on a clean surface of the oven. 



18*6103-1971 

15.5 At the end of the drying period, assemble the cell in the oven, using 
clean cotton gloves to protect the hands. Observe the precaution given 
in 15,3. 

.15.6 Quickly transfer the assembled test cell to the test chamber main- 
tained at a temperature of 5°G above the desired test temperature and allow 
the cell to attain temperature equilibrium. 

SECTION I PROCEDURE FOR MAKING REFEREE TESTS 

16. PREPARATION OF SPECIMEN AND FILLING TEST CELL 

16.1 Use only a three-terminal cell for these tests. 

16.2 When insulating liquids are heated to elevated temperatures, some of 
their characteristics undergo a change with time, and the change, even 
though of the minutest nature, may be reflected in the resistivity results. 
It is, therefore, desirable that the elapsed time necessary for the test speci- 
men to attain temperature equilibrium with the test cell be held to a 
minimum. For optimum procedure, this time should not exceed 
20 minutes. It is essential therefore that the procedure outlined in 16.4 
to 16,7 be closely followed. 

16.3 When the resistivity test is to be made subsequent to the power factor 
test, it follows that the precautions to be observed in preparation of the 
specimen and filling the test cell have already been met. In the event, 
however, that the resistivity test is to be made without making the power 
factor test, the procedure for preparation of the specimen and filling the test 
cell shall be as outlined in 16.4 to 16.7. 

16.4 In order that representative test specimens may be obtained, gently 
tilt or invert the sample container and swirl the fluid several times.' 1 
Immediately after mixing the sample, pour a quantity of fluid sufficient for 
two fillings of the test cell into a chemically clean, dry beaker and heat on 
a hot plate to a temperature 2 deg below the desired test temperature. 
During the heating period, stir the fluid frequently. 

16.5 Remove the cell from the test oven, lift out the inner electrode, but 
do not rest it on any surface, and fill the cell with a portion of the heated 
sample. Replace the beaker with the remainder of the heated sample on 
the hot plate. Insert the inner electrode and rinse the electrodes by twice 
raising and lowering the inner electrode. Remove the inner electrode and 
hold it suspended in air; then decant the rinsing fluid and immediately 
fill the cell with the remainder of. the heated sample. Replace the inner 
electrode. 

16.6 Insert a mercury thermometer {see note), graduated in 0*25fC3 
increments, in the thermometer well provided in the inner electrode. 

10 



IS t6103*1971 

Immediately return the filled cell to the tesr chamber (adjusted to a 
temperature of 5°C above the desired- test temperature ) and make the 
necessary electrical connections to the cell. 

Note — Caution — A spring-loaded thermocouple may be used for measuring the 
temperature of the inner electrode, but extreme caution shall be exercised that these 
wires do not come in contact with the voltage supply lead and do not pick up stray 
emf*s. 

16.7 Perform the operations described in 16.5 and 16.6 as rapidly as 
possible. 

Note — After much experimenting, the above technique has been evolved to give 
the most reproducible results for tests at 90°C. Little experience has been obtained 
from tests at higher temperatures. However, individual ' laboratories engaged in work 
at temperatures above 90°C have probably ' developed their own technique. 

17. PROCEDURE 

17.1 Make the resistivity measurements while the temperature of the inner 
electrode is within ± 0'5°C of the desired test temperature. If a power 
factor test has been made on the test specimen, short-circuit the cell 
electrodes for one minute, then start the resistivity measurements immedia- 
tely thereafter. 

17.2 In making the initial measurement, apply ' direct polarity ' of the 
potential to the specimen and at the end of one minute of electrification, 
record the current and voltage measurements. Short-circuit the test cell 
electrodes for a period of 5 minutes. Calculate the resistivity (see 26 J. 

17.3 At the end of the 5-minute period, remove the short-circUit from the 
electrodes, then apply ( reverse polarity * of the potential to the test speci- 
men. At the end of one minute record the current and voltage measure- 
ments and calculate the resistivity. Average the resistivity values obtained 
from the i direct ' and * reverse ' polarity measurements. 

17.4 Pour off the liquid in the test cell and without rinsing again, fill the 
test cell with a second specimen from the sample and take another set of 
measurements as outlined in 17.2 and 17.3. 

17.5 If the difference in the resistivity values of the two specimens is with- 
in 20 percent of the higher of the two values, no further tests are required 
and the average of the two specimens shall be reported as the resistivity of 
the sample. If the difference in the values of the two specimens is not 
within 20 percent, test a third specimen. If the difference in the values 
between any two of the three specimens is not within 20 percent, clean the 
test cell and test specimens from another sample until the difference in the 
resistivity of two specimens is within 20 percent. 

17.6 When the power factor results on specimens from a sample are not 
within the limits specified in 12 of IS : 6262-1971 *, do not report the results 
of resistivity measurements on these specimens (if made) and repeat the 
test when resamples are obtained. 



♦Method of test for power factor and dielectric constant of electrical insulating liquids. 

11 



IS: 61 03 -1971 

SECTION 1 riUHISSIBLE MODIFICATIONS WHEN 
MAKING ROUTINE TESTS 

18. GENERAL 

18.1 When it is desired to get an approximation of the resistivity of a 
sample or to make tests on a group of samples of the same type of insulating 
fluid to ascertain whether the resistivity is greater or less than some speci- 
fied value, certain modifications to 16 and 17 are permitted as outlined in 
the following clauses. 

19. TEST CELL 

19.1 Any test cell conforming to the requirements given in Appendix A may 
be used. For routine tests, however, the requirements for a guard electrode 
may be waived provided that the two-electrode cell used is of adequate 
capacitance and with sufficient ratio of surface area to specimen thickness 
to provide proper operation of the measuring equipment. One such cell 
is shown in Fig. 5 (see P 18). 

20. TEST CHAMBER 

20.1 An oil bath having uniform temperature distribution and provided 
with adequate temperature regulation may be used for routine tests, 
~ovided that, when the test cell is immersed in the bath, the temperature 
ifference in the test cell between any part of the inner electrode and the 
outer electrode does not exceed 2°C. A less satisfactory method is the use 
of a hot plate, but variations in temperature throughout the cell may lead 
to questionable results. In general, the use of a forced-draft air test 
chamber is preferable. 

21. TEST TEMPERATURE 

21.1 Resistivity measurements may be made when the test specimen is 
within ± 2'0°G of the desired temperature. 

22. CLEANING TEST CELL 

22.1 Since some two-electrode cells cannot be dismantled, the cleaning 
procedure given in 15 cannot always be followed. Where this applies, it 
is imperative that each laboratory evolves a good cleaning procedure for 
the cell used so that repea table results may be obtained. Only solvents 
mentioned in 15.2 as being satisfactory shall be used as cleaning agents. 

22.2 When a number of samples of the same type of fluid are to be tested 
consecutively, the same test cell may be used without cleaning, provided 
that the resistivity of the sample previously tested was greater than the 
specified value. If the resistivity of the last sample tested was less than the 
specified value^the test cell shall be cleaned before using for further tests. 

12 



13 i 6103 -1971 

23. PROCEDURE 

23.1 Because of the difference in construction of the various types of test 
cells that may be used for routine tests, no detailed procedure for prepara- 
tion of the specimen and filling of the test cell is given. Due regard should 
be given to the precautions outlined in 16. 

23.2 Before fillings always rinse the test cell with a portion of the sample 
to be tested. 

24. ELECTRICAL CONNECTION 

24.1 When making electrical connection to a two-electrode cell, the shield 
on the lead usually connected to the guard electrode ( see Fig. 1 on P 6 ) 
shall be securely clipped to the PTFE ( polytetraflouro ethylene ) insulation 
in order to prevent contact with any surface. 

25. NUMBER OF TESTS 

25.1 Only a single test specimen need be tested in measuring the resistivity 
of a sample. 

26. CALCULATIONS 

26.1 Calculate the resistivity of a specimen p in ohm-centimetres X 10 12 by 
using one of the following equations, depending on whether the galvano- 
meter or picoammeter was connected in the test circuit: 

a ) Using the galvanometer for current measurement: 

ExK 



P = 



DxG, 



b) Using the picoammeter for current measurement: 

ExK 

where 

E = test voltage in volts, 

K — cell constant in centimetres, 

D — galvanometer deflection in divisions, 

G, —galvanometer sensitivity in amperes X 10~ 12 per division, 
and 

/— current in amperes x 10 -la . 
13 



IS t6103 -1971 

27. REPORT 

27.1 Use the following table as a guide in reporting the values of resistivity: 

p, ohm-cm X 10 l * Report Value to 

500 or greater Nearest 50 

100 or greater, but less than 

500 . Nearest 10 

10 or greater, but less than 

100 Nearest integer 

Less than 10 Two significant figures 

27.2 The report shall include the following: 

a) Type of cell used, 

b ) Method of measurement, 

c ) Average voltage gradient in the sample while under test in V/mm, 

d ) Temperature of the sample while under test, 

e) Temperature and humidity of the room during test, and 

f) Specific resistance (resistivity) of the sample. 



APPENDIX A 

(Clauses 8.1, 8.2 and 19.1) 

CELLS USED FOR MEASURING SPECIFIC RESISTANCE 
(RESISTIVITY) OF ELECTRICAL INSULATING LIQUIDS 

A-l. DESIGN OF CELL 

A-l.l A cell, for the purpose of measuring the specific resistance 
(resistivity) of electrical insulating liquids should meet the following, 
general requirements. 

A-l. 1.1 The design of the cell shall be such as to facilitate easy and 
thorough cleaning of its component parts, permit the use of the cell in a 
suitable temperature bath, and provide means for measuring the tempera- 
ture of the liquid under test. 

A-l. 1.2 The materials used in constructing the cell shall be non-porous 
and capable of satisfactorily withstanding the temperature to which the 
cell will be subjected under test. The alignment of the electrodes shall not 
be influenced by this temperature nor by the operation of filling the cell 
with the test liquid. 

A-l .1.3 The electrodes or their surfaces shall be made of a metal capable 
of resisting attack by mild acids, such as are found in oils of petroleum 
origin, particularly after prolonged exposure at elevated temperatures. 

14 



IS: 6103- 1971 

Metals .that have been found satisfactory from this standpoint are gold, 
nickel, monel, platinum, and stainless steel. Plated surfaces that may be 
satisfactory for short periods of time for testing liquids having low acidity 
are gold, platinum, nickel, chromium over nickel, or rhodium. 

A-l.1.4 When most accurate resistivity determinations are to be made, 
a guard electrode shall be provided which adequately shields the measur- 
ing electrode. A shielded wire or coaxial cable shall be used to connect the 
guard and measuring electrodes, either directly or by a plug to the 
measuring circuit. 

A-l.1.5 The solid insulation used to support the guard electrode relative 
to the measuring electrode shall not extend into the portion of the sample 
being tested. 

A-l.1.6 The insulating materials used in constructing the cell shall not 
absorb or be adversely affected by the test liquids or cleaning solvents. 
The insulation resistance of these insulating materials shall necessarily be 
high, particularly that between the guard and the measuring electrodes. 
Insulating materials that have proved satisfactory are borosilicate glass, 
quartz, steatite, and PJTE (polytetraflouro ethylene). Thermoplastic 
materials, such as hard rubber and polystyrene, although having good 
electrical properties, are not suitable as they soften below 130°C. Insulating 
materials of the moulded mica-dust type have been found to absorb solvents 
and, therefore, are not considered as satisfactory in the measurement of 
liquids having high resistivity values. 

A-l.1.7 In designing the cell t the distance across the surface of the tes 
specimen and across the solid insulating material between the guard and 
the measuring electrode shall be great enough to withstand adequately the 
test potential used. Leakage across these paths has been found to produce 
erroneous results. 

A-l.1.8 The surface area of the measuring electrode and the gap spacing 
between the measuring electrode and the high voltage electrode shall be 
such that the ratio of surface area to the thickness of the test specimen shall 
be large enough to provide sufficient current for adequate operation of the 
measuring equipment. It is required, however, that the precision of the 
measurements meet the intended accuracy of this method. 

A-2. RECOMMENDED TEST CELLS 

A-2.1 Four cells that have been found suitable for measuring the resistivity 
of electrical insulating materials are shown in Fig. 2, 3, 4 and 5. The 
following is a description of each: 

a) Figure 2 — The cell shown in Fig. 2 is a three-terminal cell intended 
for making referee tests where absolute resistivity determinations 
are to be made. It is made of monel, its volume is 185 ml, its 
capacitance with air as the dielectric is approximately 75 pf, and 
it is suitable for use at voltages up to 5 kV and temperatures 
uptol50°C. 

15 



IS 16103-1971 

b) Figure 3 — The cell shown in Fig. 3 is also a three- terminal cell 
intended for making research investigations on small volumes of 
liquid at temperatures up to 500°G. It is made of monel, its volume 
is 40 ml, its capacitance with air as the dielectric is approximately 
35 pf, and it is suitable for use at voltages up to 5 kV. 

c) Figure 4 — The cell shown in Fig. 4 is a three- terminal cell also 
intended for making referee tests and research investigations on 
small volumes of liquid at temperatures up to 150°G. It is made 
of stainless steel, its volume is 45 ml,, and it is suitable for use at 
voltages up to 3 kV. 

d) Figure 5 — The cell shown in Fig. 5 is a two-electrode cell intended 
solely for making routine tests where it is desired to ascertain 
whether a sample is greater or less than some specified value. The 
concentric cylinders are of nickel-plated brass which are mounted 
on a PTFE ( polytetraflouro ethylene ) base and contained in an 
800-ml borosilicate glass beaker. The volume of oil required when 
using this cell is 500 ml. The cell is suitable for use at voltages 
up to 5kV and temperatures up to 150°G. 



THERMOMETER WELL 



QUARTZ OR PYREX 
GLASS 




GUARD 
ELECTRODE 



OUTER 
ELECTRODE 

INNER 
ELECTRODE 



2*0 mm GAP 
SPACING 



Fig. 2 Cell for Referee Tests 

4 

16 




THERMOMETER 
WELL 



SCREW THREAD 



INSULATION 
BORON i7g 

NITRIDE mm 



GUARD 
ELECTRODE 



OUTER 
ELECTRODE 



1 -3 mm GAP 
SPACING 



INNER 
ELECTRODE 




HANDLE 



GUARD < 

ELECTRODE 




PYREX 
GLASS 




OUTER 
ELECTRODE 



SpJ — 2*0 mm GAP 
SPACING 



Fig. 3 Cell for Research 
Investigation 



Fig. 4 Small Capacity Cell for Referee Tests and 
Research Investigations 



IS t 6103- 1971 




BGOm! PYREX 
GLASS BEAKER 

OUTER 
ELECTRODE 

2*5 mm GAP 
SPACING 

INNER 
ELECTRODE 



TEFLON INSULATION 
FOR MOUNTING ELECTRODE* 



Fig. 5 Two Electrode Cell for Routine Tests 



IS 



BUREAU OFINDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters : 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 

Telephones ; 323 01 31 

323 94 02 

323 83 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

{ Common to all Offices ) 

Regional Offices: 

Telephone 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 1 10002 323 76 17 

323 48 41 
'Eastern : 1/14 CIT Scheme VII M, V.I.R Road, Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700054 337 86 62 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160 022 60 38 43 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 6001 13 235 23 1 5 

fWestern : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marof, Andheri ( East ), BOMBAY 400093 832 92 95 

Branch Offices: 

'Pushpak', Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, AHMADABAD 380001 30 13 48 

tPeenya Industrial Area, 1st Stage, Bangalore-Tumkur Road, 39 49 55 

BANGALORE 560058 
Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T.T. Nagar, BHOPAL 462003 55 40 21 

Plot No. 21 Satyanagar, BHUBANESHWAR 751007 40 36 27 

Kalaikathir Building, 6/48 Avanashi Road, COIMBATORE 641037 21 01 41 

Plot No. 43, Sector 16 A, Mathura Road, FARJDABAD 121001 8-28 88 01 

Savitri Complex, 1 16 G. T. Road, GHAZIABAD 201001 8-71 1 9 96 

53/5 Ward No. 29, R.G. Barua Road, 5th By-lane, GUWAHATI 781003 54 1 1 37 

5-8-56C L N. Gupta Marg, Nampalty Station Road, HYDERABAD 500001 20 10 83 

R 14 Yudhister Marg, C Scheme, JAIPUR 302005 38 13 7 

117/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 21 68 76 

Seth Bhavan, 2nd Floor, Behind Leela Cinema, Naval Kishore Road, 23 89 23 

LUCKNOW 226001 

Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 80001 3 26 23 05 
C/o Smt. Sunita Mirakhur, — 

66 D/C Annexe, Gandhi Nagar, JAMMU TAWI 180004 
T. C. No. 14/1421, University RO., Palayam, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM 695034 6 21 17 

Inspection Offices (With Sale Point): 

Pushpanjaii, 1st Floor, 205- A, West High Court Road, Shankar Nagar Square, 525171 

NAGPUR 440010 
Institution of Engineers ( India ) Building, 1332 Shivaji Nagar, PUNE 411005 32 36 35 



* Sales Office is at 5 Chowringhee Approach, P.O. Princep Street, 27 99 65 

CALCUTTA 700072 
t Sales Office is at Novelty Chambers, Grant Road, BOMBAY 400007 309 65 28 

t Sales Office is at 'F Block, Unity Building, Narasimharaja Square, 22 39 71 

BANGALORE 560002 

Printed at New India Printing Press, Khurja, India 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 SEPTEMBER 1987 
TO 

18:6103-1971 METHOD OF TEST FOR SPECIFIC 

RESISTANCE (RESISTIVITY) OF ELECTRICAL 
INSULATING LIQUIDS 



( Page 11, clauses 17.2 and 17.3) - Substitute 
the following for the existing two clauses: 

"17.2 In making the measurement, apply only * direct 
polarity* of the potential to the specimen and at 
the end of 1 min of electrification record the 
current and voltage measurements. Calculate the 
resistivity ( see Note). 

Note - The reverse polarity reading need 
not be recorded as widely differing direct and 
reverse polarity readings are obtained for 
most of the new insulating oils. The final 
resistivity value can be reported based on the 
direct polarity reading only." 

( Page 11, clause 17.4, line 3) - Delete the 
words 'and 17. 3 f and renumber the clauses '17.4, 
17.5 and 17.6'as '17.3, 17.4 and 17.5' respectively. 



(ETDC 64) 



Printed at New India Printing Press, Khurja, India 



