**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 4247-1 (1993) : Code of practice for structural design of 
surface hydroelectric power stations. Part 1: Data for 
design [WRD 15: Hydroelectric Power House Structures] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 4247 (Parti): 1993 
^TTcfk m^^ REAFFIRMED 

(dl^<:i "pRl^nr ) 

Indian Standard 

STRUCTURAL DESIGN OF SURFACE 
HYDROELECTRIC POWER STATIONS 

PART 1 DATA FOR DESIGN - CODE OF PRACTICE 

( Third Revision ) 



UDC 627-8504 : 621-311-2 : 00676 



® BIS 1993 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARO 

NEW DELHI 110002 

Ntmrnbtr 1993 Prle* Groap 4 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 JANUARY 2008 

TO 
IS 4247 (PART 1) : 1993 STRUCTURAL DESIGN OF 
SURFACE HYDROELECTRIC POWER STATIONS 

PART 1 DATA FOR DESIGN - CODE OF PRACTICE 
(Third Revision) 

(Page 1, clause 2) — Substitute iS 7207 : 1992'/or 'IS 7207 : 1991". 



(WRD 15) 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



Hydroelectric Power Houie Structures Sectional Committee, RVD IS 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard ( Part 1 ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Hydroelectric Power House Structures Sectional Committee had been approved by 
the River Valley Division Council. 

For the structural design of a power house certain basic data with respect to site of the power 
house equipment to be installed, the features of operation and materials for construction are 
necessary, and this standard is intended to serve as a guide for designers in collection of these 
data. 

This standard was first published in 1967. The first revision of the standard was taken up in 1978^ 
and subsequently revised in 1984. This third revision has been taken up to incorporate the 
changes in light of the experience gained during the last few years to the use of this standard. 
The important changes are in respect to meterological data and collection of data from layout 
drawing. 

This standard has been published in three parts. Part 2 of the standard deals with the design of 
superstructure while Part 3 deals with the design of substructure. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is compliced with, 
the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded 
off in accordance with IS 2:1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values (r^v/.yerf)\ The 
number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the 
specified value in this standard. 



IS 4247 ( Part 1 ) : 1993 



Indian Standard 



STRUCTURAL DESIGN OF SURFACE 
HYDROELECTRIC POWER STATIONS 



PART 1 DATA FOR DESIGN - CODE OF PRACTICE 

( Third Revision ) 



1 SCOPE 



1.1 This standard ( Part 1 ) covers the data 
required to be collected for the structural design 
of surface hydroelectric power stations. 

1.1.1 The data will serve only to proceed with 
the designs. For preparing final construction 
drawings further details should be collected at 
different stages for which constant liaison should 
be maintained with the equipment suppliers, the 
electrical/mechanical engineers and architects. 

2 REFERENCES 

The Indian Standards listed below are necessary 
adjuncts to this standard: 



IS No. 

3177-1977 



4461-1979 



7207-1991 



10060-1981 



3 GENERAL 



Title 

Code of practice for electric 
overhead travelling cranes and 
gantary cranes other than steel 
works cranes (first revision ) 

Code of practice for joints in 
surface hydroelectric power 
stations (first revision ) 

Criteria for design of generator 
foundation for hydroelectric 
power station (first revision ) 

Code of practice for subsurface 
investigation for power house 
sites 



3.1 The comparative layout studies should be 
earned out and the most advantageous layout 
from technical feasibility and economic consi- 
deration should be adopted and designs for the 
hydroelectric power stations should be prepared 
for the same. 

3.2 The structural design of a hydroelectric 
power station consists of the following steps: 

a) Analysis for stability against static and 
dynamic loads at various stages of con- 
struction and operation; 

b) Design of the substructure including 
foundation; 



c) Design of the intermediate structure 
including spiral casings and generator 
support; 

d) Design of the superstructure including 
roof; and 

e) Design of auxiliary rooms, service bay 
and any other component where it forms 
a part of the power house. 

3.2.1 The various components and the sequence 
of construction of hydroelectric power stations 
are shown in Fig. 1, 2 and 3 are indicative only. 

4 COLLECTION OF DATA 

4.0 Before the structural design may be under- 
taken certain data should be collected from the 
lite and from the equipment suppliers. A 
consolidated list of such data is given in 4.1 
and 4.2. 

4.1 Data from the Site 

The following data should be collected from the 
site: 

a) A contoured/contour plan of the site on 
a 1 : 1 000 scale with appropriate contour 
interval including the location of intake 
structure, water conductor system, surge 
tank, if any, power house, switchyard 
(substation), tall race and any other 
relevant features. 

b) A complete longitudinal section of the 
water conductor system from the intake 
up to the tail race with maximum and 
minimum water levels at both ends, 
hydraulic particulars of the water con- 
ductor sytem and any other salient 
feature occurring in the system. 

c) A chart showing the strata below found- 
tion level approximately to a depth equal 
to the width of the power house, in 
addition exploratory boring may be 
taken to deeper levels, in case of doubt- 
ful strata refer to IS 10C60 : 1981. 

d) Propcities of the soil or rock from 
surface to foundation level and at lower 
levels, if weaker strata exist, and perme- 
ability characteristics of overburden. 



IS 4247 ( Part 1 ) : 1993 

WiRI 



K-lva FIRST STAGE CONCRETE 

SECOND STAGE CONCRETE 

OAhfTRY CRANE 




DRAFT TUBE 
STEEL LINER 



1 A Sequence of Construction 




I Stage 

( Substructure y 

II Stage 

( Concerting of 
draft tube liner, 
erection of 
speed ring and 
spiral casing ) 

III Stage 
(Concrete around- 
spiral casing) 

IV Stage 

( Generator 
foundation and 
generator floor y 



1 B Alternate Sequence of Construction 
NOTE — The lequence of construction may be modified to suit the construction schedule. 
Fig. 1 Typical Section of a Hydbl Power Station with Vertical Shaft Reaction 
Turbine Showing the Components and Sequence of Construction 

2 



IS 4247 ( Part 1 ) : 1993 



FTT) FIRST STAGE CONCRETE 
SECOND STAGE CONCRETE 




AUXIUARY SET PIPE LINE 



Fio. 2 Typical Section of a Hydroelectric Power Station 
WITH Horizontal Shaft Reaction Turbine 



SPOUT . 



JOINT FILLER 



or PCNSTOCK 



SLOPE or DRAIN 



»PRCCA$T BLOCKS 
^- TOP OF STRUCTURAL 
CONCRETE 



UPLIFT y ' • I 



•PRESSURE PIPE 




UPLIFT PRESSURE 
PIPE 



FIRST STAGE CONCRETE 
SECOND STAGE CONCRETt 



Fio. 3 Typical Cross Section of a Surface Hydroelectric Power Station 
WITH Vertical Shaft Pelton Turbine 



IS 4247 ( Part 1 ) : 1993 



e) The results of load test and dynamic 
characteristics of foundation strata for 
the foundation of various structures. 

f) Maximum electrical resistivity of found* 
tion strata observed every month over a 
period of one year. 

g) The coeflScient friction between concrete 
and soil or rock and cohesion of unit 
shear strength under dry and submerged 
conditions and also of foundation 
material along weak shear zones and 
bedding planes. For preliminary design 
the values given in Table 1 maybe 
used. 

h) Maximum and ininimum ground water 
level based on available data. 

j) Physical characteristics of the backfill 
material, that is cohesion, angle of inter- 
nal friction, density in dry and saturated 
conditions, permeability, etc. 

k) Geophysical characteristics of the soil or 
rock ( geological information, such as 
presence of solution cavities, faults, 
seams, bedding planes, seismic status 
with parameters and possibility of rock 
falls ). 

m) Meteorological Data— This may include 
the following: 

i) Monthly minimum and maximum 
temperature of river water, 

ii) Monthly minimum and maximum 
temperature of ambient air, 

iii) Average monthly rainfall and its 
maximum intensity, 

iv) Area of catchment which will drain 
water through power house site, 

v) Values and directions of wind 
velocity, and 

vi) Maximum depth of snowfall. 

n) Characteristics and leads of construction 
materials. 

p) Gauge and discharge data carrying 
observed flood at tail race exit. 

Table 1 Values of Unit Shear Strength and 
Coefficient of Friction 



( Clause 4A ) 




SI No. Material 


Unit Shear 


Coefficient 




Strength 


of 




C. Min 


Friction 


(1) (2) 


(3) 
N/mm« 


(4) 


i) Rock ( massive 


3 


080 


and sound ) 






ii) Concrete 


3 


0-80 


iii) Rock ( fractured, 


07 


0-60 


jointed ) 






iv) Gravel 





0-50 


v) Sand 





0-40 


vi) Clay ( hard ) 


007 


0-30 


vii) Clay (soft) 


002 


0-20 



4.2 The information given in 4.2.1 to 4*2.4^ 
should be finalized by the structural engineer in 
consultation with the electrical engineer and 
equipment suppliers. 

4^2.1 Layout Drawings 

These involve the following: 

a) Layout of the power house and appurte- 
nant works such as cable tunnel, 
switchyard, by- pass water conductor 
system including tail race and access 
road. 

b) General plan of the power house showing 
the erection bay, control room, offices, 
workshop, utilities, etc, and other allied 
structures. 

c) Plan at generator floor level showing, 
location of staircases, equipment and 
openings, etc. 

d) Plan at turbine floor level showing 
location of staircases equipment opening, 
etc. 

e) Plan at centre line of spiral casing 
showing location of butterfly/spherical 
valve, expansion joint, etc. 

f) Plans showing features such as (i) 
galleries, (ii) draft tube deck, (iii) Trans- 
formers and fire walls, (iv) Transformer 
and gantry crane rails, (v) Transformer 
oil drainage pit, (vi) Draft tube gates 2nd 
gantry crane, (vii) Drainage and dewater- 
ing sump, (viii) Water tanks, (ix) Ducts, 
trenches and openings, etc. 

g) Plans of the erection bay, control rooms 
and cable room showing dimensions of 
the erection pits, location of control 
equipment and cable racks, etc. 

h) Transverse section (along the flow of 
water) through the centre line of 
machines, through the control and 
administration block and erection bay* 

j) Longitudinal section (at right angles to 
the direction of flow) through the centre 
line of machines. 

k) Longitudinal section showing the 
upstream galleries. 

m) Longitudinal section showing the down-- 
stream galleries. 

n) Longitudinal section through the control 
bay, oflSces, erection bay, etc. 

p) The shape and profile of the draft tube 
and its gated control along with hoisting 
arrangement and its liner with details of 
supports and turn buckles and access 
into draft tube, etc. 

q) Shape and profile of spiral casing with 
details of supports and turn buckles for 
steel spiral casing including information^ 
regarding concreting around the spiral 
casing, location of access for inspection,, 
etc. 



IS4247(Partl):199^ 



, t) Plan and elevations of generator founda- 
* tions showing details of base plates^ 
anchor bolts, blockouls. etc.; 

s) Drainage and dewatering arrangement 
comprisiivg: (1)' penstock, (2) draft tube, 
(') powerhouse drainage, (4) natural 
drainage, etc. 

t) Location of constriiction, contraction 
and expansion joints ( s^e IS 4461 : 
1979). 

u) Dimension, location and arrangement of 
speed ring supports. 

v) Dimension, location and arrangement of 
inlet valve (if provided) supports. 

w) Layout of tail race. 

y) Number, dimensions, clearancces of 
E.O.T. cranes and drawings giving 
details of the crane. 

z) Slope protection in the vicinity of power 
plant and drainage. 

zl) Layout of passage and size of bus ducts. 

z2) Layout of airconditioning and ventilation 
ducts and general arrangement thereof. 

4.2.2 Loads 

The loads imposed by the equipment and acces- 
sories should be shown in plan and section such 
that the point of application of the load as well 
as its base area are clearly indicated. If during 
the initial stages it is not possible to give the 
exact dimensions, orientation and load of the 
various auxiliary equipment coming on different 
floors, design for areas listed under Parts A and 
B of Table 2 may be done for the loads 
indicated against each area. 

4.2.3 The data including loads and forces for 
which details should be furnished by the 
suppliers, are as follows: 

a) Details of maximum loads and dimen- 
sions of generator stator and rotor 
components, braking and short-circuit 
torque and unbalanced megnetic pull in 
radial direction (see IS 7207 : 1991 ) 
giving information for the following: 

1) Vertical load on stator sole plates: 

- 2) Tangential force in direction of 
rotation on stator sole plates; 

3) Tangential force in direction of 
rotation on stator sole plates; 

4) Vertical force on lower bracket sole 
plates; 

5) Tangential force in direction of 
rotation on lower bracket sole 
plates; 

6) Force due to unbalanced magnetic 
pull ( radial force ); 

7) Seismic force on stator sole plate; 



8) Seismic force on lower bracket sole 
plate; 

9) Impact factor; and 

10) Directions and point of applications 
of above loads. 

NOTE — Conditions under which the above loads 
act should be specifi:d as normal conditions, short 
circuit of stator, double short circuit of rotor, etc. 

Table 2 Minimum Uniformly Distrlbated 
Live Load 

( Clause 4,2,2 ) 



SI No. Area of Location 


Live Load' 


(1) (2) 


(3) 




N/m« 


PART A 




(The Indicated loads Include equipment load) 


i ) Roofs : Accessible 
Inaccessible 


1 500 

750 


ii) Stairways 


5000 


iii) OflSce and corridors 


5000 


iv) Reception rooms 


5000 


v) Circuit breaker rooms 


20 000 


vi) Control room 


10 000 


vii) Cable spreading room 


10 000 


viii) Equipment and storage rooms 


10 000 


jx) Maintenance shop 


15 000 


x) Fan room (air-conditioning, heating 
and ventilating equipment) 


5 000 


xi) Auxiliary electric equipment room 


10 000 


xii) Steel grating/chequered plate 


5 000 


xiii) Tool room 


10 000 


xiv) Galleries with light or no equipment. 


10 000 



namely, carbon dioxide, drainage 
(no pump), heat exchanger, pipe, 
dewatering (no pump), ventilating, 
battery rooms, motor generator 
room, operating floors (other than 
generator floor and telephone room) 

xv) Water — treatment room 



7 500 



PART B 

i) Erection floor 


50 000 


ii) Generator floor 


10 000 


iii) Turbine floor 


15 000 


iv) Pump rooms and oil purification 
rooms 


10 000 


v) Transformer beck 


10 000 


vi) Gantry deck (outdoor power house), 


10 000 



intake deck (general), power house 
access and draft tube deck 

vii) Air compressor room, penstock and 10 OOO 

valve floor, generator-protective 
equipment gallery and switch gear 
room 

NOTES 

1 If the power house is located in snow-bound areas, 
suitable snow load should be taken into account. 

2 The above loading h for preliminary design only. 
The final design should be checked for the actual 
equipment load. 



IS 4247 ( Part 1 ) : 1993 



b) Machine characteristics comprising of: 

1) normal and runaway speed» 

2) permissible tilt in the shaft » and 

3) open'ng and closing time of the 
governor. 

c) Load of the inlet valves including its 
auxiliaries. 

d) Load of turbine runner including that of 
shaft, spiral casing loads ( comprising 
the mass of embedded parts, such as 
spiral casing, speed ring and cover plates ) 
erection load of the spiral casing liner 
and the load in empty and full condi- 
tions, transferred by each pedestal. 

•c) Loads induced by the draft tube liner 
comprising its mass and centre of 
gravity. 

f) Size, load and permissible alternative 
position, together with details for access 
and support of: 

1) mechanical auxiliary equipment of 
the generator and turbine, such as 
air compressors, oil resrvoirs and 
cooling water pumps, oil pump 
tanks ; governors, strainers, drainage 
and dewatering pumps; and 

2) electrical auxiliary equipment, such 
as main and auxiliary transformers. 

g) Load of equipment coming over the 
control room and cable room floors. 

h) Loads for which the runner and generator 
supports ( in the erection bay ) are to be 
designed. 

j) Load and dimensions of the heaviest 
part/package to be transported in the 
power house. 

k) Erection and live loads on the various 
floors ( see Table 2 ). 

m) Details of EOT crane {see IS 3177 : 1977) 
giving information on: 

1) the number and spacing of wheels 
of crane/cranes, when placed buffer 



(o buffer and clearance required 
from ceiling and inner face of 
columns {see Annex A). 

2) load and centre of gravity of bridge 
girders and wheels bogies, 

3) crane surges in longitudinal and 
transverse directions; 

4) rated capacities and highest levels of 
^ main and auxiliary hooks; 

5) load of crane girders with rails and 
level of top of rails; 

6) load and rated capacity of lifting 
beams, if provided; 

7) traction forces (both in transverse 
and longitudinal directions) and 
impact allowance; 

8) Crane striking forces in longitudinal 
and transverse directions; 

9) crane testing load; and 

10) method of erecting the EOT 
crane. 

n) Thrust due to servomotors. 

p) Jet reaction of pelton turbine. 

q) Vertical and horizontal loads of each 
switchyard equipment along with its 
supporting structures/towers, pulls of 
conductors and directions and points of 
application 

4.2.4 Hydraulic Data 

The following should be indicated: 

a) Horizontal thrust due to water to pen- 
stock indicating mode of transfer; 

b) Water-hammer load due to sudden 
closure of the machine; 

c) Hydraulic thrust in the vertical direction 
due to water on runner; 

d) Velocity diagram along the draft tube; 
and 

e) Pressure diagram along the draft tube 
during normal running of the machine. 



ANNEX A 
[ Clause A.23{m){\)] 
PROFORMA FOR RECORDING DETAILS OF CRANE LOADING 

1 Capacity of crane.... 5 i) Horizontal distances of main and auxi- 

liary hooks from upstream crane rail when 

2 Span the hooks are at their extreme upstream 

position. 

3 Load of crane without crab along with loca- -x tt • . i j. 

tion of its centre of gravity *'/ Horizontal distances of mam and auxi- 

lary hooks from the downstream crane 

4 Independent crab load with location of its rail when the hooks are at the extreme 
centre of gravity downstream positions. 

6 



IS 4247 ( Part 1 ) : 1993^ 



iii) HorizoBtal distances of the hooks from 
the end buflfers of the crane. 

6 Position of crane wheels, with respect to end 
buffers 

7 Side and vertical clearances 

8 Number of wheels and wheel spacing 

9 Wheel loads 

i) For unloaded crane with trolley at its 
upstream most position 

ii) For unloaded crane with trolley at its 
downstream most position 



iii) For loaded crane with trolley at its 
upstream most position 

iv) For loaded crane with trolley at its 
downstream most position 

10 Crane surged in transverse and longitudinal 
distances 



11 Striking crane surges 
longitudinal directions 



in transverse and 



12 Height of the centre line of the end buffers 
of the crane above the top of the crane rail. 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on 
products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced 
to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, 
testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the 
producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to 
that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use 
of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from 
the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



BoretQ of Indltn Standtrds 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Aet^ 1986 to 
promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization* marking and quality 
certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in 
any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use» in 
the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details* . such as symbols and sizes, type or 
grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are 
also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reafiSrmed when such review 
indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken 
up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the 
latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 'BIS Handbook' and 'Standards 
Monthly Additions*. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following 
reference: 

Doc: RVD15 (31) 

Amendments Issued Since Pobllcatlon 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

( Common to all Offices ) 

Regional Offices: Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 331 01 31 

NEW DELHI 110002 1 331 13 75 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola f 37 84 99, 37 85 61 

CALCUTTA 700054 \ 37 86 26, 37 86 62 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35.C, CHANDIGARH 160036 f 53 38 43, 53 16 40 

( 53 23 84 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 f 235 02 16, 235 04 42 



Western I Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) f 632 92 95, 632 78 58 

BOMBAY 40093 I 632 78 91, 632 78 92 



235 15 19, 235 23 15 

{ 



Branches: AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. OUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. 
LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 

Printed at Paragon EnterpritM, Delhi, la^t 



