**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 8263 (1976) : Methods for radio interference test on high 
voltage insulators [ETD 6: Electrical Insulators and 
Accessories] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS ^8263 -1976 

( Reaffirmed 2004 ) 



Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR RADIO INTERFERENCE 
TEST ON HIGH-VOLTAGE INSULATORS 

( Fir« Reprint FEtlRUARY 1933 ; 



UDC 621.31^. 62, OZf 3iS21. 391^ 623l 621. 396 ] : 620 ,1 




OC&pyright 1977 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAK BHAVAN, « HAHADUH SHAM ZAFAR MARG 

NEW PELHJ 110002 

Qf 2 February 1977 



18:8263-1976 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR RADIO INTERFERENCE 
TEST ON HIGH-VOLTAGE INSULATORS 

Electrical Insulators and Accessories Sectional Committee, ETDC 3 

Chairman Representing 

Shri L. C. Jain Ministry of Energy, New Delhi 

Members 

Shri V. R. Ananthanarayanan Bengal Potteries Limited, Calcutta 

Shri Chandar Parkash { Alternate ) 
Dr a. S. Bkaduri National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri S. K. Mukherjee ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. N. Bhagat All India Pottery Manufacturers* Association, 

Calcutta 
Shri B. C. Daw ( Alternate) 
Shri D. S. Chabhal Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Shri R. T. Chari Tag Corporation, Madras 

Shri A. K.Chopra Punjab State Electricity Board, Patiala 

Shri Nirvair Singh ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. N. Deb Damodar Valley Corporation, Calcutta 

Shri A. C. Bose ( Alternate ) 
Director ofJ^esearch Maharashtra_State Electricity Board, Bombay 

Director (Traction and Research, Designs & standards Urganization, 
Installation ) Ministry of Railways, Lucknow 

Joint Director Standards, 
T-1 {Alternate) 
Director ( Transmission ) Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi 

Deputy Director ( Trans- 
mission ) ^Alternate ) 
General Manager ( T ) Posts & Directorate General of Posts & Telegraphs (Dcpart- 
Telegrahs, Jabalpur ment of Communications), New Delhi 

Director of Telegraphs (L) 

( Alternate ) 
Divisional Engineer, Tele- 
graphs (C) ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. N. Ghosh Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri M. L. Mittal ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. P. Agarwal ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. S. Kochar Rural Electrification Corporation Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri P. Rao ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1977 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of 
the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS; 8263 -1976 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri H. M. S. I.INGAIAH Karnataka Electricity Board, Bangalore 

Shri G. S. Mahagaonkar Mysore Porcelains Ltd, Bangalore 

Dr G. M. Phadke Indian Electrical Manufacturers' Association, 

Bombay 
Shri K. N. Jayaram ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. S. Raman - New Government Electric Factory, Bangalore 

Shri E. P. Wilfered ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. V. Ramdoss Tamil Nadu Electricity Board, Madras 

Shri V. K. Arumngam ( Alternate ) 
Shri M, Sankaralingam Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals 

( Inspection Wing ), New Delhi 
ShriN. S. Sethuramon W. S. Insulators of India Ltd, Madras 

Shri V, Srinivasan ( Alternate ) 
Dr U. S. Singh High Tension Insulator Factory, Ranchi 

^hri A. D. DuA ( Alternate ) 
Shri SuRENDRA Singh U.P. Government Pottery Development Centre, 

Khurja 
ShriT. B. L- Srivastava ( Alternate ) 
Shri L. Venkatasubbu Seshasayee Industries Ltd, South Arcot District 

Shri R. V. Achuthan ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. P. Sachdev, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Elec tech ) 

Secretary 

Shri R. C. Jain 

Deputy Director ( Elec tech ), ISI 



IS : 8263 - 1976 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR RADIO INTERFERENCE 
TEST ON HIGH-VOLTAGE INSULATORS 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 26 November 1976, after the draft finahzed by the Electrical Insulators 
and Accessories Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electro- 
technical Division Council. 

0.2 This standard covers the test method for radio interference ( R I ) test 
on clean dry insulators at frequencies in the range of 0'5 MHz to 2 MHz. 
It is recognized that the radio interference characteristics of an insulator 
may be modified by ambient conditions in service, such as moisture, rain 
and pollution. However, radio interference tests simulating all of such 
conditions, besides being very complicated may be unnecessary. Exception 
may have to be made for pollution conditions, for which a special test may 
have to be developed. 

0.3 The frequency range 0*5 MHz to 2 MHz is considered sufficient, except 
for polluted surface conditions, which may generate interference at higher 
frequencies. Actually, except for polluted surface conditions, the inter- 
ference from insulators considerably decreases when frequency increases 
above 2 MHz, unless some kinds of faults external to the insulator are 
present ( faulty contacts between metal parts especially when corroded, 
damaged arc devices, etc ). 

0.4 In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from 
lEC Pub 437(1973) 'Radio interference test on high voltage insulators/ 
issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission. 

0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing 
the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with 18:2-1960*. 
The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should 
be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



1, SCOPE 



1.1 This standard covers the method for carrying out the radio interference 
test for bushings, post insulators, rigid insulators, string insulator units and 
string insulator sets, 

♦Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised '). 



IS : 8263 - 1976 

Note — The performance of a complete string insulator set is not precisely 
calculable from the results of tests on the units, but an approximation may be made 
taking voltage distribution into account. This may enable tests on single units to be 
made as an alternative to more complicated tests on the- complete string. 

2. GENERAL 

2.1 The radio interference characteristics of an insulator may be determined 
by measurements at a series of voltages, but to specify an insulator perform- 
ance it is necessary to specify the maximum permitted radio interference 
level at a specified test voltage. The specified test voltage shall be related 
to the voltage to be applied to the insulator in normal service, that is, equal 
to the highest system voltage divided by \/3- Since the service voltage is 
not a characteristic of an insulator, different radio interference test voltages 
may apply to the same insulator for different operating conditions. 

2.2 The method of mounting the insulator and the presence of arcing 
horns, grading rings, etc, may considerably influence the results of radio 
interference tests, especially for the larger insulators. 

2.3 The radio interference level to be permitted at the specified test voltage 
depends on many factors, such as the importance and vulnerability of the 
radio communications which are to be protected against interference and 
the distance of the receiver from the source of interference. For all these 
reasons, agreement between the manufacturer and the purchaser may be 
necessary to decide the following: 

a) The value of test voltage, 

b) Details of the arrangement of the insulator for test, and 

c) The level of radio interference to be accepted. 

Note — The values of acceptable radio interference levels are under consideration 
for stipulation in the relevant equipment specification. 

3. APPLICABILITY OF THE TEST 

3,1 This test is an optional type test and shall be made only, in special cases 
when agreed by the purchaser and the manufacturer. This agreement shall 
in particular specify the value of test voltage and the level of radio inter- 
ference to be accepted ( see 2.3 ). 

4. ARRANGEMENT OF INSULATORS FOR TEST 

4,1 The details of the arrangement of the insulators for test and the 
accuracy with which service conditions need to be reproduced shall be 



IS : 8263 - 1976 

subject to agreement between the purchaser and the manufacturer, taking 
account of the following guidance: 

a) For rigid insulators and string insulator units, the standard 
method of mounting given in B-2 of 18:731-1971* is usually 
satisfactory. 

b) String insulator sets, post insulators or bushings with rated light- 
ning impulse withstand voltages of 325 kV or less may usually be 
tested with the standard method of mounting given in B-2 of 
IS:73l-1971*, C-1 of IS:2544-1973t and B-1 of IS:2099-1973J 
respectively. 

c) Insulators with rated lightning impulse withstand voltages greater 
than 325 kV should be mounted for test closely imitating service 
conditions. They should be complete with ancillary metal fittings, 
such as arcing horns or grading rings, hooks, hnks, yokes and 
conductor clamps. The earthed metal work on which the 
insulator shall be supported and the high-voltage conductor to be 
used in service may also be simulated. 

5. TEST PROCEDURE 

5.1 The test circuit shall be as shown in Fig. L 

5.2 The measuring set shall comply with IS:6872-1972§. It shall preferably 
be tuned to a frequency within 10 percent of 0*5 MHz, but other frequencies 
in the range of 0*5 MHz to 2 MHz may be used, the measuring frequency 
being recorded. 

5.3 The results shall be expressed as xiB above 1 micro-volt [ dB (/^V) ] 
across a resistance of 300 ohms and the effective resistance of the measuring 
set and any resistors associated with it (T^l) should preferably be 300 ohms. 
If other resistance values are used, they shall be not more than 600 ohms 
nor less than 30 ohms, the equivalent radio interference voltage across 
300 ohms may be calculated assuming the measured voltage to be directly 
proportional to the resistance, except for test pieces of large capacitance, 
such as bushings, for which a correction made on this basis may be 
inaccurate. Therefore a 300 ohms resistance is always recommended for 
bushings. 

♦Specification for porcelain insulators for overhead power lines with a nominal 
voltage greater than 1000 V ( second revision ). 

jSpecification for porcelain post-insulators for systems with a nominal voltages 
greater than 1 000 V ( first revision ). 

f Specification for bushings for alternating voltages above 1 000 V ( first revision ). 

§Specification for radio interference measuring apparatus for the frequency range 
0-15 MHz to 1000 MHz. 



IS:S263-1976 




EARTHED SUPPORTING STRUCTURES 
INSULATOR UNDER TEST 

ALTERNATIVE 
j^ POSITION OF M 



DETAILS OF M 



F - 

M - 
/2l- 



h — 



Filter having a high impedance at the measuring frequency. 
Measuring equipment. 

Equivalent resistance of R\ in series with the parallel combination of Ki and 
the resistance of the measuring set- 
May be either a capacitor or a circuit composed of a capacitor and an 
inductor in series. When /Jl is of the order of 300^3 the impedance of Z% 
and i?L in series at the measuring frequency shall be 300 ±40^3 and have a 
phase angle not exceeding 20''. 

Has a low impedance at 50 Hz to shunt power-frequency current from the 
measuring set, but has a high impedance, for example greater than 3 OOOi?, 
at the measuring frequency. 

Fig. 1 Details of the Test Circuit for Radio 
Interference Test on Insulators 

5.4 The filter F shall have a high impedance at the measuring frequency so 
that the impedance between the high-voltage conductor and earth, Zs+i?L 
is not appreciably shunted as seen from th^ insulator under test. This 
filter also reduces circulating radio frequency currents in the test circuit 
generated by the high-voltage transformer or picked up from extraneous 
sources. A suitable value for its impedance has been found to 
be 10000 ahmsto 20 000 ohms at the measuring frequency. 



IS: 8263 -1976 

5.5 When the test insulator is removed or replaced by an element known 
to be free from radio interference, the radio interference level indicated by 
the measuring set ( the background level ) at the specified test voltage shall 
be as low as possible and preferably 10 dB below the specified radio 
interference level of the insulator to be tested. In a determination of the 
radio interference characteristics of an insulator, the background level shall 
be at least 6 dB below the lowest level which is to be measured. 

5.6 As the radio interference level may be affected by fibres or dust 
settling on the insulator, it is permitted to wipe the insulator with a clean 
cloth before taking a m^easurem^ent. The atm.ospheric conditions during 
the test shall be recorded. It is not known what correction factors apply 
to radio interference testing, but it is known that tests may be sensitive to 
high relative humidity and the results of tests may be open to doubt if the 
relative humidity exceeds 80 percent. 

5.7 The test procedure shall be in accordance with 5.7.1 and 5.7.2. 

5.7.1 A voltage 10 percent higher than the specified test voltage shall be 
applied to the object under test and maintained for at least 5 minutes. The 
voltage shall then be decreased by steps down to 30 percent of the specified 
test voltage, raised again by steps to the initial value and finally decreased 
by steps to the 30 percent value. At each step, a radio interference 
measurement shall be taken and the radio interference levels as recorded 
during the third run shall be plotted versus the applied voltage;, the curve 
so obtained is the radio interference characteristic of the insulator.- 

NoTH — Each voltage step shall be approximately JO percent of tbe speciffed test 
voltage. 

5.7.2 The string insulator ^et, string insulator-unit, post insulator, bush- 
ing or rigid insulator passes the radio interference test if the radio 
interference level at the specified test voltage, as read from the radio 
interference characteristic, does not exceed the specified radio interference 
level. Furthermore, no sudden increase shall be found on the radio 
interference characteristic between the specified test voltage and Ti times 
the specified test voltage. 

Note 1 — In the absense of a specified test voltage, the radio interference 
characteristic of an insulator may be determined by measurements as described 
above over a suitable range of applied voltages. To cover any likely values of 
specified test voltage, it is suggested that the radio interference characteristic is 
measured for the voltage range 3 percent to 30 percent of the dry power-frequency 
flashover voltage of the insulator. 

Note 2 — Because of the high variability, it is preferable to make radio inter- 
ference measurements on a number of insulators. The radio interference character- 
istic is the mean curve obtained taking into account all measurements made on 
insulators of one type. 

Note 3 — 18:6872-1972* gives information regarding the other suitable circuits 
which may be employedfor measurement of radio interference. 



♦Specification for radio interference measuring apparatus. 

7 



