***•••*•**•••••• 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 



Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 



Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
'The Right to Information, The Right to Live' 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



IS 12089 (1987) : Specification for granulated slag for the 
manufacture of Portland slag cement [CED 2: Cement and 
Concrete] 



M<>5iVff7n^sb^ja^rssa^iTv;aa!Sg; 



5?5?-m |7*55^!S&^N5«^^ 



-<:-<:^vv^^ 




Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledg 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 




Vii^ 




i4> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : lion • 1«7 

( Reaffirmed 2004 ) 



Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR GRANULATED 
SLAG FOR THE MANUFACTURE OF 
PORTLAND SLAG CEMENT 



UDC 66G9 022-492 : 6660*3 



:|| VopyngM 1987 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK. BHaVAN* *i BABADUR HHAH ZAFAR MARO 
NEW DELHI WiAWl 

Q^. 3 Jkwfmirf/ 1987 



IS : 12089 . 1987 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR GKANULATED 
SLAG FOR THE MANUFACTURE OF 
PORTLAND SLAG CEMENT 

Cement and Concrete Sectional Committee, BDG 2 

Chairman Representing 

Dr H. G. Visvbsvaraya National Council for Cement and Building Mate- 

rials, New Delhi 

Members 
Additional DiRECTOB Standards Research, Designs & Standards Organization 
( B&S ) ( Ministry of Railways ), Lucknow 

Deputy Director Standards ( B&S ) 
( Alternate ) 
Shri K. p. Banbrjeb Larsen & Toubro Limited, Bombay 

Shbi Habish N. Malani ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. K. Banerjee National Test House, Calcutta 

Chief Engineer ( BD ) BhakraBeas Management Board, Nangal Township 

Shei J. G. Basur ( Alternate ) 
Chief Enginbbb ( Designs ) Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 

Executive Engineer (D) III ( Alternate ) 
Chief Engineer ( Reseabch-ctjm- Irrigation & Power Research Institute, Amritsar 
Director ) 

Rbseahoh Oeficeb { Conceete 
Technology ) ( Alternate ) 
Dieectob a. p. Engineering Research Laboratories, 

Hyderabad 
Joint Dibectok ( Alternate ) 
Director Central Soil and Materials Research Station, New 

Delhi 
Chieb- Research Officer {.Alternate ) 
Dibectok ( C & MDD-I ) Central Water Commission, New Delhi 

Deputy Director ( G & MDD-I ) 
( Alternate ) 
Shri V. K. Ghanbkar Structural Engineering Research Centre ( CSIR ), 

Roorkee 
Shri S. Gopinath India Cements Ltd, Madras 

Shri T. TamilakaraN ( Alternate ) 
Shri A, K. Gupta Hyderabad Industries Ltd, Hyderabad 

( Continued ov page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1987 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproductioa in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copvright under the said Act. 



IS t 12089 . 1987 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Sbbi p. J. Jaqus Associated Cement Companies Ltd, Bombay 

Dr a. K. Chatterjbe ( Alternate ) 
Shbi N. G. JosHi Indian Hume Pipes Co Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi R. L. Kapoob Ministry of Transport ( Department of Surface 

Transport ) ( Roads Wing ) 

Shbi R. K. Saxbna ( Alternate ) 
Sbbi S. K. Laha The Institution of Engineers ( India ), Calcutta 

Shbi B. T, Unwalla ( Alternate ) 
Db a. K. Mullick National Council for Cement and Building Mate- 

rials, New Delhi 

Shbi BimaK Dasotjpta ( Alternate ) 
Shbi H. S. Pasbicha Hindustan Prefab Ltd, New Delhi 

Shbi Y. R. Phuli. Indian Roads Congress, New Delhi; and Central 

Road Research Institute ( CSlR ), New Delhi 
Shbi M. R. ChattjcbJbb Central Road Research Institute { CSIR ), New 
( Alternate ) Delhi 

Db Mohan Rai Central Building Research Institute ( CSIR )i 

Roorkee 
Db S. S. Rehsi { Alternate ) 
Shbi A. V. Ramana Dalmia Cement ( Bharat ) Ltd, New Delhi 

Db K. C. Narano ( Alternate ) 
Shbi G. Ramdas Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, 

New Delhi 
Db a. V. R. Rao National Buildings Organization, New Delhi 

Saui J. Sen Gupta ( Alternate ) 
Shbi T. N. Subba Rao Gammon India Ltd, Bombay 

Shri S a. Rbddi ( Alternate ) 
Db M. Ramaiah Structural Engineering Research Centre ( CSIR ), 

Madras 
Db a. G. Madhava P.ao ' Alternate '^ 
Shbi A. U. Rijhsinghani Cement Corporation of India, New Delhi 

Shbi G. S. Sharma ( Alternate ) 
SbCBETaby Central Board of Irrigation & Power, New Delhi 

Shbi K. R. Saxena ( Alternate ) 
Shbi H. S. Satyanabayana Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters, 

New Delhi 
Shbi V. R. Kotnis ( Alternate ) 
Shbi R. K. Sinha Development Commissioner for Cement Industry 

( Ministry of Industry ), New Delhi 
Shbi S. S. Miqlani ( Alternate) 
SuPbbintbndinq Engine KB Public Works Department, Government of Tamil 
/ Designs ) Nadu, Madras 

Executive Engineer ( S. M. R. 
Division } ( Alternate ) 
Shbi L. Swaeoop Orissa Cement Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri H. Bhattachabya ( Alternaff ) 
Shbi S. K. Guha Thakueta Gammon Dunkerley & Co Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi S. P. Sankaeanahayanan ( Alternate ) 
Shbi G. Raman, Director General, BIS ( Ex-offieio Member ) 

Director ( Civ Engg ) 

Secretary 

Shbi N. C. Bandyopadhyay 

Deputy Director ( Civ Engg ), BIS 

( Continued on page 8 ) 

2 



IS t 12089 - 1987 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR GRANULATED 

SLAG FOR THE MANUFACTURE OF 

PORTLAND SLAG CEMENT 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards 
on 27 May 1987, after the draft finalized by the Cement and Concrete 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division 
Council. 

0.2 Granulated slag is used for the manufacture of hydraulic cement by 
mixing Portland cement clinker, gypsum and granulated slag in suitable 
proportions and grinding the mixture to get a thorough and intimate nnix 
between the constituents. Portland slag cement may also be manufactured 
by separately grinding Portland cement clinker, gypsum and granulated 
slag and then mixing them intimately. 

0.3 This standard contains clause 5.1 which calls for agreement between 
the purchaser and the supplier regarding the manner in which granulated 
slag shall be supplied and whether moisture content is to be determined. 

0,4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expres- 
sing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard covers the requirements of granulated slag used in the 
manufacture of Portland slag cement conforming to IS : 455-1976t. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definition shall apply. 

♦Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 
♦Specification for Portland slag cement ( third revision ). 



IS : 12089 - 1987 

2. 1 Granulated Slag — Slag is a non-metallic product consisting essenti- 
ally of glass containing silicates and aluminates of lime and other bases, as 
in the case of blastfurnace slag, which is developed simultaneously with 
iron in blastfurnace or electric pig iron furnace. Granulated slag is obtain- 
ed by further processing the molten slag by rapidly chilling or quenching 
it with water or steam and air. 

3. COMPOSITION 

3.1 The physical state of aggregation of granulated slag shall be in the 
form of granules. The proportion of lumps exceeding 50 mm size shall not 
constitute more than 5 percent of the mass of slag. 

3.2 When tested in accordance with the methods given in IS : 4032-1985*, 
the composition of granulated slag shall comply with the following chemi- 
cal requirements: 



Constituent 


Percent, Max 


Manganese oxide 


5-5 


Magnesium oxide 


17-0 


Sulphide sulphur 


2-0 



3.3 The percentages of major oxides in the granulated slag, determined in 
accordance with the methods given in IS : 4032-1985*, shall satisfy at least 
one of the following: 



GaO+MgO+1/3 AlaOg 



Si02+2/3 AlaOg 
GaO + MgO+AlaOg 
SiOa 



> 10 
> 1-0 



However, in case of slags containing more than 2*5 percent of man- 
ganese oxide (MnO) , the slag shall also satisfy 

CaO-l-CaS+1/2 MgO + AlaOg 



SiOa+MnO 



> 1-5 



^ 



3.4 The insoluble residue of dried samples of granulated slag, determined 
in accordance with IS : 4032-1985* shall not be more than 5 percent. 

3.4.1 The glass content of granulated slag shiall not be less than 85 per- 
cent as determined by the method of optical microscope given at 
Appendix A. 



♦Method of chemical analysis of hydraulic cement { first revision ). 



IS t 12089 - 1987 

4. SAMPLING 

4.1 Granulated slag shall be supplied in lots of 500 tonnes each. If the 
quantity of slag delivered is less than 500 tonnes, it shall be considered 
a lot. 

4.2 Samples shall be drawn from at least five points of the wagon or truck 
as the case may be. Each sample shall weigh about one kg. 

4.3 The samples belonging to one lot collected as in 4,2, shall be thoroughly 
mixed and a composite sample of 20 kg shall be collected. 

4.4 The sample of 20 kg, obtained, as under 4.3, shall be divided into two 
equal parts. One part shall be retained in a tightly sealed container for 
future reference. 

4.5 From the remaining portion of the slag sample, three samples of about 
one kg each shall be drawn by methods of reduction and used for the 
determination of moisture content adopting the procedure given in 
Appendix B. 

4.6 The remaining sample of slag, after drawing three samples as under 
4.5, shall be air dried and blended thoroughly with the dry samples 
obtained from 4.5 and tested for conformity with 3.1. The coarse and fine 
fractions obtained in this test shall be blended again thoroughly and ground 
to pass 150 ;xm IS sieve. The material obtained as above shall be treated 
as the sample for all the tests under 3.2, 3.3 and 3,4. 

Note — In case the moisture content of the slag is not to be determined, 4.5 may 
be skipped and the entire material remaining after 4,4 shall be air dried and tested 
for conformity with 3.1. 

5. INSPECTION 

5.1 The manner in which granulated slag shall be supplied should be 
decided by agreement between the purchaser and the supplier. In case the 
moisture content is to be determined, the method given in Appendix B 
shall apply. 

Note — The moisture content in granulated slag shall be as agreed to between 
the purchaser and the manufacturer. 

5.2 The manufacturer shall guarantee the conformity of the granulated 
slag with the requirements of the standard and furnish each lot of supplied 
slag with a certificate bearing the following: 

a) Name and address of the manufacturer, 

b) Certificate number and date of issue, and 

c) Number of wagons containing the said lot. 



IS 1 12089 - 1987 



5.2.1 If desired by the purchaser, the test results of the consignment 
according to this standard shall also be supplied. 



APPENDIX A 

{ Clause 3A.I) 

METHOD OF TEST FOR GLASS CONTENT OF 
GRANULATED SLAG 

A-1. APPARATUS 

A-].l Microsrotie — The Tnirroscnne usrd for the r>urr)OSe shall be 
polarizing microscope used generally for the examination of thin sections, 
and should have provision for mechanical stage and point counting. The 
magnifying power of the microscope shall not be less than lOOx. 

A-2, REAGENT 

A-2.1 Bromoform — Bromoform shall be of A.R or G.R grade 
chemical. 

NoTB — Any other liquid having refractive index between 1*5 to 1*6 may also 
be used as an alternative to bromoform. 

A-3, PROCEDURE 

A>3.1 From about 5 g of a representative sample of powdered slag, a frac- 
tion passing through 90 (mih IS Sieve and retained on 52 jum IS Sieve shall 
be treated as the sample for microscopic investigation as under A-3. 2. 

A-3.2 About one mg of powdered slag is placed on a rectangular glass 
slide and a cover glass having its size less than the width of the rectangular 
slide is placed on the material. One or two drops of bromoform or any 
other suitable liquid ( see A-2.1 ) is added at the rim of the cover glass. It 
is seen that the liquid enters between the cover glass and glass slide. A 
gentle relative motion between the slide and cover glass shall be created to 
disperse the material evenly in the immersion liquid. No attempt shall be 
made to rub one slide over the other after the bromoform has been added. 
The powder immersion section is examined with transmitted light under 
the polarizing microscope at a magnification of about 200. About 1 500 
grains are counted {jY{) by changing the field of view and traverses using 
a mechanical stage with the help of cross-wire in the eye piece. Subsequen- 
tly under crossed nicols, the same field of view already scanned is examined 
once again in similar fashion and grains which appear anisotropic and 
opaque arc counted (JVj). 



IS : 12089 - 1987 



A-4. CALCULATION 



A.4.1 Calculate the glass content of granulated slag as follows: 



J^i 



Glass content, percent = lUU X 

APPENDIX B 

( Clauses 4.5 and 5.1 ) 

METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF MOISTURE CONTENT 
OF GRANULATED SLAG 

B-1. APPARATUS 

B-l.L Drying Chamber — The air oven or other device such as an 
infra-red moist determinator used for the purpose shall have adequate 
chamber space to contain at least three samples of about one kg each of 
granulated slag, when the material is spread in a metallic tray, with the 
thickness of the material layer not exceeding 3 cm. The drying chamber 
shall also have provision for temperature control at 110 ± 5°G. The 
drying chamber shall be an electrically operated unit. 

B-2. PROCEDURE 

B-2.1 The mass of the three samples of moist granulated slag of about one 
kg are determined, nearest to one g {Wi, W^, ^z)- The samples are 
spread separately in metallic rays of suitable dimensions such that the 
thickness of the slag layer does not exceed 3 cm. The trays are kept in the 
drying chamber maintained at 110 ± 5®G, and retained there till the 
mass of sample becomes constant nearest one g, as determined by periodic 
Weighing. The final masses of the dry samples are recorded as W^, W5, W^ 
respectively. 

B-3. CALCULATION 

B-3.1 Calculate the moisture content of granulated slag as follows: 

Moisture content, percent = ^^ -rlZ — lii — rir-^ ^-^ 



IS : 12089 - 1987 

( Continued from page 2 ) 

Cement Subcommittee, BDG 2 : 1 

Convener Representing 

-Db H. G. Visvesvaraya National Council for Cement and Building Materi- 

als, New Delhi 

Db a. K. Mulj.ick 
Db ( Mrs ) S. Laxmi ( Alternates to 
Dr H. C. Visvesvaraya ) 
Shbi S. K. Banebjbb National Test House, Calcutta 

Shk.1 Somnath Baneejeb Cement Manufacturers' Association, Bonibay 

Chief Enqineeb ( Reseaeoh-ctjm- Irrigation Department, Government of Punjab, 
DjKECTOK ) Chandigarh 

Research OmcBB ( CT ) ( Alternate ) 
Development Ofi-igeb Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Dieegtob Maharashtra Engineering Research Institute, 

Nasik 
Research Officer ( Alternate ) 
DiRECTCB ( GMDD ) Central Water Commission, New Delhi 

Deputy Dikeotoe ( CMDD ) ( Alternate ) 
Shbi R. K. Gattani Shree Digvijay Cement Co Ltd. Bombay 

Shri a. K. VaishNavi ( Alternate ) 
Shbi P. J. Jagus Associated Cement Co Ltd, Bombay 

Db A. K, Chatteejee ( Alternate ) 
Ti^T-wTm r)TTs g;i~iri-j-»T» ^ii^c'Tii * tt. iiTi R'^search Designs and Standards Organization 

{ B & S ) ( Ministry of Railways ), Lucknow 

Deputy Dirbotob, Reseaech ( B&S )-I 
( Alternate ) 
Shbi R. L. Kapoob Ministry of Transport ( Department of Surface 

Transport ) ( Roads Wing ) 
Shri R. K. Dutta ( Alternate ) 
Shbi W. N. Kasode Hindustan Construction Co Ltd, Bombay 

Shri K. P. Mohidebn Central Warehousing Corporation, New Delhi 

Shbi Y. R. Phull, Central Road Research Institute (CSIR ), New 

Delhi 
Shbi M. R. Chattekjee ( Alternate ) 
Shbi A. V. Ramana Dalm^ia Cement ( Bharat ) Ltd, New Delhi 

Db K, C. Nabanq ( Alternate ) 
Da A. V. R. Rao National Buildings Organization, New Delhi 

Shbi J. Sen Gupta ( Alternate ) 
Lx-Cot V. K. Rao Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters, 

New Delhi 
Shbi N. S. Galandb ( Alternate ) 
Shei S. a. Rbddi Gammon India Ltd, Bombay 

De S. S. Rehsi Central Building Research Institute ( CSIR ), 

Roorkee 
Dr Ibshad Masood ( Alternate ) 
Shbi A. U, Rijhsinghani Cement Corporation of India Ltd, New Delhi 

Shbi R. K. Sinha Development Commissioner for Cement Industry 

( Ministry of Industry ), New Delhi 
Shbi S. S. Miolani ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 9 ) 

8 



I§ : 12089 - 1987 

( Continued from page 8 ) 

Members Reptesenltng 

Shei L. Swaroop Orissa Cement Ltd, New Delhi 

Shbi H. Bhattaoharya ( Alternate ) 
SuperintJending ENQiNEffiE (D) Public Works Department, Government of Tamil 

Nadu, Madras 
Sbinioe Deputy Chiej" Engineer 
( Gbneeal ) ( Alternate ) 
Shbi C. D. Thatte Gujarat Engineering Research Institute, 

Vadodara 
Shet J. K. Patel ( Alternate ) 
Shei V. M. Wad Bhilai Steel Plant, Bhilai 



INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS (SI UNITS) 



Base Units 








Quantity 


Unit 


Symbol 




Length 


metre 


m 




Mass 


kilogram 


kg 




Time 


second 


s 




Electric current 


ampere 


A 




Tiiermodynamic 


kelvin 


K 




temperature 








Luminous intensity 


candela 


cd 




Amount of substance 


mole 


mol 




Supplementary Units 








Quantity 


Unit 


Symboi 




Plane angle 


radian 


rad 




Solid angle 


steradian 


sr 




Derived Units 








Quantity 


Unit 


Symbol 


Definition 


Force 


newton 


N 


1 N = i kg.m/sS 


Energy 


joule 


J 


1 J = 1 N.m 


Power 


watt 


W 


1 W = 1J/S 


Flux 


weber 


Wb 


1 Wb = 1 V.8 


Flux density 


tesia 


T 


1 T = 1 Wb/m2 


Frequency 


liertz 


Hz 


1 Hz = 1 c/s (s-i) 


Electric conductance 


Siemens 


S 


1 S = 1 A/V 


Electromotive force 


volts 


V 


1 V = 1 W/A 


Pressure, stress 


pascal 


Pa 


1 Pa == 1 N/mS 



