**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 10322-2 (1982) : Luminaires, Part 2: Constructional 
Requirements [ETD 24: Illumination Engineering and 
Luminaries] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



tS( 10323 (Fart 2} -IMl 

( Reaffirmed 2005 ) 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR LUMINAIRES 

FART 2 CONSTRUCTiONAL REQUIRfMENTS 



UDC 62(i94 




O Copyright 1914 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ilAFAR MARO 

H8W DELHI UOOOS 

Gr7 My l9Sa 



IS : 10322 (Part 2) -1982 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR LUMINAIRES 

PART 2 CONSTRUCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS 

Illuminating F^nginecriiig Sectional Committee, ETDC 45 

Chairman Rcprtienting 

Shri G. K. Kmkmanj Crnlral PLiblic Works Department, New Delhi 

MtmbfTS 

St'RVCYOR 0¥ VVOTIK^ III ( Kl.EnTRICAL ) 

{AHernatt Ui Shri (;. K. Khcmatii ) 
Smri G. K. AirnAL BAJaj Klettrjcals Ltd, Bombay 

Shri Jaqdisu Sharan ( AUemaie ) 
Shri i*. K. BANnvi'i-AnHYAv IViro KJcctrontcs 4 Ktcctricali Ltd, Bomb;^y 

Sum P. K. Sanyai, ( AlttrmiU) 
SitRi N. S, CttARi A'^sociation of Indian Enginerring Industry, Calcutta 

Sh»[A, Mukmerjit, {Alternate) 
Shri N. S, Guari Crompton Greaves Ltd, Bonibay 

Shr[ V. K, MAfUMDAR ( Alternate) 
Dr S. U. Das National Ttst Ilousr, Calcutta 

Smri G. HMATiAciiAkVA ( Altfrnult ) 
Shri IL N, GrPiA Dirrctoratc Grntral Factory Advice; Srrvicca & 

Labour Iitstitntc ( Ministry uf Labour }, Bombay 
Shri G. Viadyanathan [ Aliernalt) 
Shri T. S, KtM\ft Central Mfning Research Station ( CSIR), Dhanbxd 

Shri U. S. NioaM ( AUttnnte ) 
SifBi S. H. MiLLTR 1 hr Bombay VJectric Supply iind Transport Under- 

taklnfj, Bombay 
SfjRt B, S. KoTHARi ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. V. Narayanan I^iicftoratr (jmcr*! of Supplies and Dltposals, 

i\ew Delhi 
Shri Anii. <^ri>rA ( Alternate ) 
Shri \l. tJ. Pandry Directorate of Tcc}ini£.il Development and Produc- 

tion, ( Air ), ( Ministry of Defence), New Delhi 
Shri J. M. Rewali-iwar { Aittmaie) 
ShriJ. R. Pari the General TJcctric (^^ompany of India Ltd, 

Calcutta 
Shri S. K. Neooy ( AUtmaU) 
Lt-GolB. B. RajI'al Lnginccr-in-Clncf 's Branch, Army Headquarters, 

New Delhi 
Shri R. S. Kanwar ( Alitrnatt) 
Shri K. S. Sarua National Phyiical Laboriitory ( CSIR), New Delhi 

{ Continued on page 2 ) 



9 Copyright 1984 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITtmON 

This pubiication is protected under the Indian Copyriffht Act (XIV of 195T ) tad 

reproduction in whole or in part by any tncans except with written permitiioo of the 

publisher shall bo deemed to b« an infringement of copyright uadtr the uid Act, 



IS : 1032J ( Part 2 ) - 1982 

( Contimid from pagt 1 ) 

Mtmhtrt RtprttiRhng 

Shri K. p. Shanbhoov!* National Industrial Development Corporation Ltd, 

NcwDclbi 
Shri p. S. Shahma Mct.iliurgtcal Engineers and ConjultanU, Ranchi 

Shri G. S. Srivastava {Altematt) 
•ShriH. SiNHA lUunnnating Enginctring Society of India, Calcutta 

Shri K. K, Rohatoi ( Alttrnatt] 
Shu V. K. Soou The Mysore Lamp Works Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri Suresk Diiinora { AltiTnat$) 
Shri R. P. Srivastava, ROSO Railway Board, Ministry of R^uhvays 

Shri G. S. Bhatia ( Alternate ) 
Shri P N. Srinivasan PNS Lighting Drsign & ConsuUancy, Bangalore 

Shri G. N. Thadani Lugiiieer-! India Ltd, New Uflhi 

Shri S, K.. C;hosu ( Alurnatt ) 
Shri S. P.SAUinKv Director Om-raJ, ISI {Ex-officio Membtr) 

Director ( Elcc tech ) 

SicretaTV 

Shri Sukh Bir Sinqh 

I>l>utv Dirc( lor ( Elec te(.h ) 

Panel for Luminaircs in Multiparts, LTDC 45/iM 1 

Shri P. K. Dano^ovadhyay Pcico Electronics & Elcctruals Ltd, Bomlnv 

Shki N. S. Chari Crouii>Eon Grtaves Ltd, Bortibay 

CillPP Enoinehr ( Llfltiucal )-II Central Pubhc Work* Urpartment, New Delhi 

SuaVLYOR OF W0HK3 { El.PCTRlCAL } HI 

{ AUernati ) 

Shri S, H. Miller Bombay Etrctnc Supply andTran»port Lndertakmg, 
B<iinbay 
Shri B. S. Kothahi ( Alietnatt ) 

Shri J. R. Pari (Jtneral Electric ("ompany of India Ltd, Bombay 

Shri K. S. Sarma National Physical Laboratoiy f CSIR), New Dcihi 

Shri P. N. Srinivasan PNS Lighting Design & Coiuultancy, Bangalore 



IS : 10332 ( Part 2 ) - 1982 

Indian Standard 

SPBCIFIC.VriON FOR LUMINAIRES 

PART 2 CONSTRUCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian StandarU ( Part 2 ) was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 20 October 19X2, after the draft iinahzed by the illuminating 
Fngineering Sectional Committee had been approved by the Elcctrotechnical 
Division Council. 

0.2 This standard ( Part 2 ) is one of the series of Indian Standards which 
deals with luminaires. This scries will have the following parts: 

Part 1 — (jcneral requirements, 

Part 2 - Constructional requirements, 

Part 3 -~ Screw and screwlcss terminals, 

Part 4 — Methods of tests, and 

Part .S — Particular requirements. 

0.3 [n general, Parts 1, 1, 3 and 4 of this standard cover safety require- 
ments and tests for luminaires- The object of these parts is to provide a 
set of requirements and tests which are considered to be generally appli- 
cable to most types of luminaires and which can be called up as required 
by the detailed specifications under Part 5. Parts 1, 2, 3 and 4 arc 
thus not to be regarded as specifications by themselves for any type of 
himinaire, and the provisions apply only to particular types of luminaires to 
the extent determined by the appropriate section of Part 5. 

0.4 The sections of Part 5, in making reference to any other part of the 
standard, specify the extent to which that section is applicable and the 
order in which the tests are to be performed; they also include additional 
requirements as necessary. The order in which the clauses in Parts 1, 2, 
3 and 4 are nun\bered, therefore, has no particular significance as the 
ortier in which their provisions appty is determined for each type of 
luminaires or group of luminaires by the appropriate section in Part 5. 
All sections ot Part 5 are self-contained and, therefore, do not contain 
references to other sections of Part 5. 

0.5 A luminairc shall comply with a section of Part 5. If, however, an 
appropriate section of Part 5 does not exist for a particular luminaire or 
group of luminaires, the nearest applicable section of Part 5 may be used 
as a guide to the requirements and tests. 



IS: 10322 (Part 2)- 1983 

0.6 This standard is intended to establish essential requirements of general 
nature and minimum standard for design and construction of lighting 
fittings in order to ensure their safe performance, good construction and 
high class of workmanship. This standard, therefore, along with other 
appropriate Parts of this standard, will ultimately replace IS : 1913 (Part I )- 
1978*. 

0.7 In the preparation of this standard assistance has been derived from 
lEC ; 598-1 (1979): Luminaircs, Part I General requirements and tests 
published by International Flcctrotechnical Commission. 

0.8 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing 
the result of test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960t, 
The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should 
be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



i. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard ( Part 2 ) specifies general constructional requirements 
tor luminaircs for use with tungsten filament, tubular fluorescent and other 
discharge lamps on supply voltages not exceeding 1 1)00 V. 

1.2 Jt is to be read in conjunction with the other relevant parts to which 
reference is made in this standard. 

2. KEPLACKABI.E COMPONENTS 

2.1 Luminaircs incorporating components or parts intended to be replace- 
'able shall be so designed that there is sufficient space to permit replacement 
of such components or parts without diiHcufty and without impairing 
safety. 

2,1.1 Sealed-in components and riveted parts are ordinarily not replace- 
able components. 

X WIREWAYS 

3.1 Wireways shall be smooth and free from sharp edges, burrs, Hashes 
and the like, which might cause abrasion of the insulation of the wiring. 
Parts such as metal set screws shall not protrude into ^vireways. 

3.1.1 Compliance shall be checked by inspection and, if necessary, by 
dismantling and reassembling the luminaire. 

♦trcnerfil and lafety rciiuirrmctits for luminaiirs, P:\rt \ Tubular fluutc^cent I»mp» 
( sicond rtvxsinn ). 

fRules for rounding off numerical va)uc» ( rtiised). 



IS : 10322 ( Part 2 ) - 1983 

4, LAMPIiOLDKRS 

4.1 The requirements for electrical safety of integral lampholders shall be 
tluise applicable U> the himinairc as a whole with lampholder and lamp in 
position fully assembled, as for normal use. 

4.2 Connection of wiring to integral lampholder contacts may be made by 
any method giving reliable electrical contact over the service life of the 
lampholder. 

4.3 l.uminaircs for tubular fluorescent lamps designed for end-to-end 
mounting shall be so designed that the lan\p may be changed in the middle 
himinairc of a row without adjusting any other luminaire. In multi-lamp 
luminaires for tubular fluorescent lamps, the changing of any one lamp 
shall not impair the security of the other lamps. 

Compli incc shall be checked by inspection. 

4.4 Lampholders wliich are put into position by the user shall be capable of 
easy and correct positioning. 

Compliance shall be checked by inspection. 

5. STARIKR HOLDKRS 

5.1 Starter holder in luminaires other than Class II shall accept starters 
which comply witii IS : 2215-19H4*. Class II luminaires may require 
starters of Class II construction. 

<>. II RMINAL BLOCKS 

6.t If luminaires arc provided with connecting leads (tails) requiring a 
-separate terminal block for the connection to the supply cables, adequate 
space for this terminal block shall be provided within the luminaire or 
within a box delivered with the luminaire or spccitied by the manufaC' 

turers. 

The nominal cross-sectional area of conductors of the connecting 
leads ( tails ) sliall not exceed 2'5 mm''. 

6.1.1 YV.vC- Compliance shall be checked by measurenient and by an 
installatitm test, using one terminal block for each two conductors to be 
connected together, as shown in Fig. 1 and supply cables having a length 
t>f approximately SO mm. The dimensions of the terminals blocks are those 
specified by the manufacturer or, in the absence of such a specification 
10 X 20 X 25 mm. 

•Spc< ificition for star(cri for lluorcscent lamp ( third reitsion ). 

5 



IS : 10323 ( Part 2 ) - 1982 



^ LEADS{ TAILS) 
^.^I; ^^ ON F iTTJNG 




(NCON^'NG CABLE ?Omm WIDTH FOR 

EACH LINE 



Fig. 1 Terminal Block Arrangement for iNSTArxATiON 
Test for Luminaires with Conntctino Lfads ( Tails ) 

6.2 Unsecured terminal blocks arc permitted when they are so designed and 
insulated that creepage distances and clearances in accordance with Part 4 
are always maintained for any position of the terminal block, and that 
damage to internal wiring is prevented. 



7. TERMINALS AND SUPPLY CONNECTEONS 

7.1 In Class 0, Class I and Class II portable luminaires and luminaires 
which are frequently adjusted, adequate precautions shall be taken to 
prevent accessible metal parts becoming live by reason of a detached wire 
or screw. This requirement applies to supply terminals and other 
terminals such as those of lampholders and switches. The requirement may 
be met by securing the wires adjacent to their entry to the terminals, by 
suitably dimensioning the enclosure for the terminals, by the use of an 
enclosure of insulating material or by the provision of an insulating lining 
in the enclosure. 

Compliance shall be checked by inspection. 

7.2 Supply terminals shall be so located or shielded that should a wire of 
a stranded conductor escape from a terminal when the conductors arc 
fitted, there is no risk of accidental connection between live parts and 
accessible metal parts. 



IS: 10332 ( Part 2). 1982 

7.2,1 Test - Compli;ince shall be checked, for lumlnaire intended to be 
connected to the supply by means other (iian a non-detachable flexible 
cable or cord by inspection, and for luminaires intended to be connected 
to the supply by means of a non-detachable flexible cable or cord, by 
inspection and by the following test: 

An 8 mm length of insulation is removed from the end of a flexible 
conductor having the largest cross sectional area speciticd in 19. One wire 
of the stranded conductor is left, free and the remainder is fully inserted 
and clamped in the terminal. The free wire is bent, without tearing the 
insulation back, in every possible direction, but without making sharp 
bends around barriers. 

The free wire of a conductor connected to a live terminal shall not 
touch any metal part which is accessible or is connected to an accessible 
metal part and the free wire of a conductor connected to an earthing 
terminal sliall not touch any live part. 

[his test is not applicable to lampholders which have been separately 
approved in an appropriate Indian Standard. 

73 'ierminals for supply conductor, including those for non-dctachablc 
flexible cables and cords, shall be suitable for connection to ba made by 
means of screws, nuts or equally etTectivc devices. 

Screw terminals shall comply with the requirements of Part 3 of 
this standard. 

Screwless terminals shall comply with the requirements of Part 3 
( spring type ai\d snap-on connectors ) of this standard. 

lor luminaires designed to be connected by means of rigid ( solid or 
stranded ) conductors, screwless terminals of the spring type are effective 
devices, including the earth connection. No requirements are specified 
at present tor using such terminals for the connection of non-detachable 
flexible cables and cords. 

l-or luminaires designed to be connected by means of non-dctachable 
flexible cable or cord and having a rated current not exceeding 1 A, 
soldered, welded, crimped and similar connections, including snap-on 
connectors are elTcctive devices, including the earth connection. 

For luminaires having a rated current exceeding 1 A, snap-on 
connectors are suitable if the connection can also be made without making 
use of the receptacle, for example, by means of a screwed connection for 
which a threaded hole is provided in the tab. 

7.4 Terminals, other than those for supply connection, which are not 
covered by separate standards for components shall comply with the 
requirements of Part 3 of this standard. 



IS : 10322 ( Part 2 ) - 1982 

7.5 If the external wiring or supply cable is unsuitable for the tempera- 
tures reached inside the luminairc, either a connection shall be provided at 
the point of entry of the external wiring into the luminaire for the use of 
heat-resistant wiring after this point, or heat-resisting parts shall be 
supplied with the luminaire to cover the part of the wiring placed inside 
it, which exceeds the wiring temperature limit. 

8. SWITCHES 

8.1 Switches shall be adequately rated and so fixed that they are secured 
against rotation and cannot be removed by hand. 

8.2 If a live part of a switch is in the vicinity of accessible metal parts, 
or of metal parts connected to accessible metal parts, an insulating lining 
or barrier shall be interposed between this live part and tlie other metal 
part. 

8.3 Live parts of a switch are the vicinity of accessible metal parts, or 
of metal parts connected to accessible metal parts, if the distance between 
these two parts is smaller than that given in Part 3 of this standard. 

8.4 Switches in flexible cables or cords and switch-Iampholders shall not 
be used in luminaircs other than ordinary, unless the degree of protection 
against dust or moisture of the switch is in accordance with the classifka- 
tion of the luminaire. 

Compliance shall be checked by inspection. 

9. INSULATING LININGS AND SLEEVES 

9.1 Insulating linings and sleeves shall be so designed that they are reliably 
retained in position when switches, lampholders, terminals, wires or similar 
parts have been mounted. 

Self-hardening resins, such as epoxy resins, may be used to fix 
linings. 

Compliance shall be checked by inspection and by manual test. 

9.2 Insulated linings, sleeves and similar parts shall have adequate mechani- 
cal and electrical strength. 

9.2.1 Test — Compliance shall be checked by inspection, by manual test 
and by an electric strength test in accordance with Part 4 of this standard. 

10. INSOLATION OF CLASS U LUMINAIRES 

10.1 For Class H Uiminaires, contact between accessible metal parts and 
wire with basic insulation only shall be etfcctivcly prevented. The sheath 



IS: 10322 (Part2)- 1982 

of a flexible cable or cord is not supplementary insulation if it is subject to 
undue mechanical or thermal stress. Class II fixed luminaires shall be so 
designed that the required degree of protection against electric shock is 
not impaired as a result of the installation of the luminaires, for example, 
by contact ^ith conduits or metal sheaths of cables. Capacitors shall not 
be connected between live parts and the body of Class II luminaires. 

Contact between accessible metal parts and basic insulation ofin temal 
wiring may be prevented by sleeves or similar parts which comply with the 
requirements for supplementary insulation. 

Compliance shall be checked by inspection. 

10.2 Assembly joints in basic insulation and in supplementary insulation 
shall not be coincidental, neither shall any assembly joint in reinforced 
insulation give straight access to live parts. 

Compliance shall be checked by inspection. 

11. ELECTRICAL CONNECTIONS AND CURRENT-CARRYING 
PARTS 

11.1 Electrical connections shall be so designed that contact pressure is 
not transmitted through insulating material other than ceramic, pure mica 
or other material with characteristics at least equivalent, unless there is 
sufficient resilience in the metallic parts to compensate for any possible 
shrinkage of the insulating material. 

Compliance shall be checked by inspection. 

11.2 Spaced threaded screws shall not be used for the connection of 
current-carrying parts, unless they clamp, these parts directly in contact 
with each other and are provided with a suitable means of locking. 

Thread-cutting screws shall not be used for the interconnection of 
current carrying parts of metal which is soft or liable to creep, such as zinc 
or aluminium. 

Spaced threaded screws may be used to provide earth continuity, if it 
is not necessary to disturb the connection in normal use and at least two 
screws are used for each connection. 

Compliance shall be checked by inspection. 

11.3 Screws and rivets which serve as electrical as well as mechanical con- 
nections shall be locked against loosening. Spring washers may provide 
satisfactory locking. For rivets, a non-circular shank or an appropriate 
notch may be sufficient. 

Sealing compound which softens on heating provides satisfactory 
locking only for screw connections not subject to torsion in normal use. 

Compliance shall be checked by mspection and by manual test. 



IS:ia322(P«rt2)'1982 

11.4 Current-carrying parts shall be of copper, an allov contaiiUDg at least 
50 percent copper, or a material having at least equivalent characteristics. 

This requirement does not apply to screws which do not essentially 
carry current, such as terminal screws. 

Compliance shall be checked by inspection and, if necessary, by 
chemical analysis. 

113 Live parts shall not be in direct contact with wood. 

Compliance shall be checked by inspection. 

12. SCREWS AND CONNECTIONS (MECHANICAL) AND GLANDS 

12.1 Screws and mechanical connections, the failure of which might cause 
the luminaire to become unsafe, shall withstand the mechanical stresses 
occurring in normal use. 

12.1,1 Test — Compliance shall be checked by inspection and screwed 
connections shall be tightened and loosened five times. During the test, 
no damage impairing the further use of the screwed connection shall 
occur. 

The test is made by means of a suitable test screwdriver or spanner, 
applying a torque as shown in Table 1. 

TABLE 1 TOR<lUE TESTS ON SCREWS 

Nominal DtAUBTsm of Sgrsw Tos(^uv 

mm 



Up to and Including 2*8 
Over 2*8 up to and including 3*0 
Over 3*0 up to and including 3'2 
Over 3'2 up to and including 3'6 
Over 3*6 up to and including 4" 1 
Over 4*1 up to and including 4'7 
Over 4*7 up to and including 5*3 
Over 5*3 up to and including 6*0 

The shape of the blade of the screwdriver shall suit the head of the 
screw to be tested. The screws shall not be tightened in jerks. Damage to 
covers is neglected. Column 1 of Table 1 appt'^s to screws without heads 
if the screws, when tightened, does not protrude from the hole. Column 2 
applies to other screws and to nuts. 

10 



1 


2 


Nm 


Nm 


0*2 


04 


0*25 


0*5 


0*30 


0-6 


0-40 


0*8 


0*70 


1*2 


030 


1*8 


oao 


20 


— 


2*5 



IS: 10322 (Part 2) -1982 

12.2 Screws transmitting contact pressure, screws which are operated when 
mounting or connecting the luminaires and having no;ninal diameter less 
than 3 mm» shall screw into metal. 

Screws or nuts which are operated when mounting the luminaire or 
replacing lamps include screws or nuts for fixing covers, lids, etc. Connec- 
tions for screwed conduits, screws for mounting the luminaire to its 
mounting surface, hand-operated fixing screws or nuts of glass covers and 
screwed lids are excluded. 

12,2,1 Test — Compliance shall be checked by inspection and for screws 
which are operated when mounting the luminaire or when replacing the 
lamps, by the test described in 12.1. 

12.3 Screws or nuts that engage with a thread of insulating material shall 
have a length engagement of at least 3 mm plus one-third of the nominal 
screw diameter, except that this length need not exceed 8 mm. 

12.3.1 Test — Compliance shall be checked by inspection, by measurement 
and by completely removing and replacing the screw or nut, ten times. 

12.4 Screwed and other fixed connections between different parts of lumi- 
naires shall be made in such a way that they do not work loose through 
such torsion, bending stresses, vibration, etc, as may occur in normal use. 
Fixed arms and suspension tubes shall be securely attached. 

12.4.1 Test — Compliance shall be checked by inspection and by 
attempting to loosen locked connections with a torque not exceeding: 

— 2-5 Nm for thread size up to and including M 10 or corresponding 
diameters; and 

— 50 Nm for thread sizes above M 10 or corresponding diameters. 
During the test, the screw connections shall not loosen. 

12.5 Screwed glands shall comply with the following test. 

Test : Screwed glands shall be fitted with a cylindrical metal rod 
having a diameter equal to the nearest whole number of millimetres below 
the internal diameter of the packing. The glands shall then be tightened by 
means of a suitable spanner, the force shown in Table 2 being applied to 
the spanner for I minute at a point 250 nmi from the axis of the gland. 

After the test, the luminaire and the glands shall show no damage. 

12.6 Set screws and similar parts, if any, shall be tightened with a torque 
as specified in Table 1. 

13. MECHANICAL STRENGTH 

13.1 Luminaires shall have adequate mechanical strength and be so cons- 
tructed as to be safe after such rough handling as may be expected in 

11 



IS: 10322 (Part 2) -1983 



TABLE 2 TORQUE TESTS ON GLANDS 

DiAUBTsm OF TstT Rod Forcs 



Up to and including 14 

Over 14 up to and including 20 

Over 20 



Metal Glandi 


Glandi of 
Moulded 
Material 


N 


N 


25 


IS 


30 


20 


40 


30 



normal use. Tho luminaires shaU be tested as per the method given in 
Part 4 of this standard. 

14. SUSPENSIONS AND ADJUSTING DEVICES 

14.1 Mechanical suspensions shall have adequate factors of safety. 
Compliance shall be checked by the appropriate following tests. 

14.2 Test for all suspended luminaires — A constant-evcnly distributed load 
equal to four times the weight of the luminaire shall be added to the 
luminaire in the normal direction of the load for a period of 1 h. There 
shall be no appreciable deformation of the components of the suspension 
system at the end of this period. Where alternative means of fixing or 
suspension are provided, each shall be tested separately. For adjustable 
suspension, the load shall be applied with the bearing cable fuUy extended. 

14.2.1 Test for rigid suspension luminaires — A torque of 2*5 Nm is 
applied to the luminaires for a period of 1 minute, first in a clockwise and 
then in an anti-clockwise direction. For this test, it shall not be possible 
to rotate the luminaire relative to the fixed part by more than one revolution 
in either direction. 

14.2.2 Test for rigid suspension brackets — Details of the test for rigid 
suspension brackets are as follows : 

a) For heavy duty brackets ( for example workshop brackets ), a force 
of 40 N shall be applied for 1 minute, in various directions at the 
free end, with the brackets arm fixed as in normal use. The 
bending moment resulting from this test shall be not less than 
2*5 Nm. When the test force has been removed, the brackets arm 
shall not be permanently displaced or deformed so as to endanger 
safety; and 

12 



IS: 10322 (Part 2) -1982 

b) For light-duty brackets ( for example, domestic brackets ), a similar 
test to Item (a) shall be applied for 1 minute, but with a force of 
10 N, and the bending moment resulting from this test shall be 
not less than 10 Nm. 

14.3 The mass of the luminaire suspended by flexible cables or cords shall 
not exceed 5 kg. The total nominal cross-sectional area of the conductors 
of flexible cables or cords suspending pendants shall be such that the stress 
in the conductors does not exceed 15 N/ram». 

For the calculation of the stress, only the conductors are considered. 

Where luminaires of mass greater than 5 kg are intended to be 
suspended, the design of the luminaire or of the flexible cable or cord shall 
be such as to prevent any tension being applied to the conductors. 

NoTB — This requirement can be met by using a cable which incorporates tutuble 
load-carrying cores. 

14.4 Adjusting devices, for example, joints, hoisting devices, adjusting 
brackets or telescopic tubes, shall be so constructed that cords or cables 
are not pressed, clamped, damaged or twisted by more than 360"* during 
operation. 

14.4.1 Test — The adjusting device, equipped with the appropriate cable 
or cord shall be operated in accordance with the details of Table 3. A 
cycle of operation is a movement from one extreme of the range to the 
other and back to the starting position. The rate of movement shall not 
cause the device to heat appreciably and shall not exceed 600 cycles per 
hour. 

After the test, not more than 50 percent of the strands in a conduc- 
tor shall be broken, and the cord or cable shall be subjected to, and shall 
satisfy, the insulation resistance and high-voltage tests specified in Part 4 
of this standard. 

Ball-joints and the like where the clamping means can be adjusted are 
tested with the joints only highly clamped to avoid excessive friction. If 
necessary the clamping areas are readjusted during the test. 

14.5 Cords or cables passing through telescopic tubes shall not be fixed to 
the outer tube. Means shall be provided for avoiding strain on the 
conductors at the terminals. 

Compliance shall be checked by inspection. 

14.6 Guide pulleys for flexible cords shall be dimensioned to prevent 
damage to the cords by excessive bending. Grooves in the pulleys shall be 
well rounded the diameter of the pulley at the bottom of the groove being 
at least three times the diameter of the cord. Accessible metal pulleys shall 
be earthed. 

Compliance shall be checked by inspection. 
13 



IS : 10322 (Part 2). 19S3 



TABLE 3 TESTS ON ADJUSTING DEVICES 

( CUus* 14.4.1 ; 

Tm or LuHiHAiRx Nuvasa of Cyclxs or Opsration 



Over Anticipated Over Maximum 
Normal Working Ponible Range 
Range of Movemeat of Movement 

Luminatret intended to be frequently 1 500 150 

adjusted, for example, drawing board 

iuminairei 
Luminairei intended to be occaiionally 150 15 

adjiuted, for example, shop-window 

spotlights 

Lumtoairei intended to be adjusted 45 5 

during installation only, for example, 
floodlighting luminaires 



15. FLAMMABLE MAIXRIALS 

15.1 Parts of flammable materials not having an insulation function, 
including covers, shades and similar parts, which do not withstand the 
300'C hot mandrel test specified in Part 4 shall be adequately spaced from 
any heated part of the luminaire (for example, ballasts under failure 
conditions or parts of filament lamps ) which could raise the material to its 
ignition temperature. These parts of flanunabie materials shall have 
suitable fastenings or supporting devices to maintain this spacing. 

15.2 The spacing from heated parts mentioned above shaU be at least 
30 mm unless the material is protected by a screen spaced at least 3 mm 
from the heated parts. This screen shall withstand temperatures up to 
iSCC, shall not have any holes, and shall have height and length at least 
equal to the corresponding dimensions of the heated parts. The require- 
ments of this clause do not apply in those cases where the luminaire 
provides an effective barrier to burning drops. 

Materials which bum fiercely, such as celluloid, shall not be used for 
translucent covers or shades. 

15.3 The requirements of this clause do not apply to small parts such as 
wiring clips and resin-bonded paper parts used inside the luminaire. 

The requirements of this clause are in Figure 2. 

Compliance shall be checked by inspection and by measurement. 

A sheet steel screen of 05 mm thickness complies with the 350*C 
requirement. 

14 



lS;10322(Part2)-1982 

FLAMMABLE MATEktAL 




All dimensions in millimetres. 

Fig. 2 Illustration of the Requirements of Clause 13 

16. LUMINAIRES MARKED WITH ^^ SYMBOL 

16.1 Luminaires classified as suitable for direct mounting on normally 



Hammable surfaces, that is luminaires marked with the symbol 



V 



shall have non-flammable material between windings and possible mounting 
surfaces. 

Compliance shall be checked by measuring the shortest distance from 
any visible winding to any mounting surface. A hole in non-flammable 
material permitting a distance of less than 35 mm shall not exceed 10 mm'. 

If windings are totally enclosed by a non-flammable canister, no 
measurement is made. 

The \^ symbol requirements apply only to luminaires which; 

a) are for fluorescent or discharge lamps; 

b) incorporate a ballast of inductive type or a transformer; and 

c) are offered for mounting on normally flammable surfaces. 

15 



IS : 10322 ( Part 2 ) - 1982 

16.2. Requirements for luminaircs with regard to temperature of 
adjacent surfaces under failed ballast conditions. 

For luminaires with an \^ symbol, the excessive ballast 

temperatures which may arise due to ballast failure shall not cause a fire 
hazard. 

This requirement shall be met by spacing the ballast from the 
mounting surface in accordance with 16.2.1 or by the use of thermal 
cut-outs in accordance with 16.2.2 or by compliance with 16.2.3. 

16.2.1 The ballast case shall be spaced from the mounting surface by a 
distance of at least 10 mm (including the thickness of the luminairc case 
material ). 

This 10 mm spacing shall include a minimum of 3 mm air space 
between the outer surface of the luminairc case and the mounting surface 
of the luminairc in the region of the ballast, and a minimum of 3 mm air 
space between the ballast case and the inner surface of the luminairc case. 
The luminairc shall be so designed that the necessary air space between 
the mounting surface and the luminairc case is automatically obtained 
when it is mounted as in normal use. 

Compliance shall be checked by inspection and by measurement. 

16.2.2 The luminairc shall include a temperature sensing control external 
to the ballast to limit the temperature of the mounting surface of the 
luminairc to a safe value. 

The temperature sensing control may be either an auto-reset thermal 
cut-out, a manual reset thermal cut-out or a thermal link ( a thermal cut-out 
which operates only once and then requires replacement ). 

Compliance shall be checked by inspection and by the lest specified 
in Part IV of this standard. 

16.2.3 If the luminairc does not comply with the spacing requirements 
of 16.2.1 and does not incorporate thermal cut-outs in accordance with 
16.2.2 it shall be so designed that it satisfies the test specified in Part 4. 

NOTB — This requirement and itt teit arc based on the asiumption, that, during 
failure oftheballast^ for instance owing to short-circuited windings or a short-circuit 
to the case, the temperature or the baltait winding shall not exceed 350*C for a dura- 
tion of more than 15 minute and therefore the temperature of the mounting surface 
shall not exceed 1S0*C for a duration of more than 15 minute. 

16 



IS; 10323 (Part 2) -1982 
n. DRAIN HOLES 

17.1 Drip-proof, rain-proof, splash-proof and jet-proof lumioaires shall be 
so designed that if water accumulates in the luminaire it can drain out 
eflfectively, for example, by opening one or more drain holes. Watertight 
luminaires shall have no provision for draining. 

17.1.1 Test — Compliance shall be checked by inspection and by the tests 
specified in Part 4 of this standard. 

17.2 A drain hole in the back of a luminaire for surface mounting is 
effective only if the design ensures a clearance of at least 5 mm from the 
mounting surface, for example, by means of projections from the back. 

18. RESISTANCE TO CORROSION 

18.1 Ferrous parts of drip-proof, rain-proof, splash-proof, jet-proof, 
watertight and pressure-water-tight luminaires, the rusting of which might 
cause the luminaire to become unsafe, shall be adequately protected against 
rusting. 

19. EXTERNAL AND INTERNAL WIRING 
19.1 Supply Coonection and other External Wiring 

19.1.1 Luminaires shall be provided with one of the following means of 
connection to the supply: 

Fixed luminaires Terminals; 

Plugs for engagement with socket- 
outlets connecting leads ( tails )\ 
Non-detachable flexible cables or 
cords; 

Adapters for engagement with supply 
tracks. 

Ordinary portable luminaires Non-detachable flexible cables or 

cords; Appliance inlets. 

Other portable luminaires Non-detachable flexible cables or 

cords. 

19.1.2 Non-detachable flexible cables and cords shall be of sufficient 
mechanical and electrical properties and should comply with the relevant 
Indian Standards on flexible cables and cords. 

17 



IS : 10322 ( Pari 2 ) - 1982 

19.1.2.1 To provide adequate mechanical strength, the nominal cross- 
sectional area of the conductors shall be not less than: 

Ordinary luminaires Other luminaires 
mm' mm* 

Total current up to and 

including 3A 0-5 10 

Total current greater than 

3A 0-75 l-O 

19.1.3 Noa-detachable flexible cables or cords shall be connected to 
rewirable luminaires in such a manner that replacement may be performed 
without special purpose tools, for example, crimping tools. 

19.1.4 Compliance with the requirements of 19.1.1 and 19.1.3 shall be 
checked by inspection and, if necessary, by fitting the appropriate flexible 
cable or cord, 

19.1.5 For non-rewirable luminaires, where moulded-in flexible cables or 
cords may be used, the cable or cord shall not be connected by means of 
screwed connections. 

19.1.6 Cables entries shall be suitable for the introduction of the conduit 
or the protective covering of the cable or flexible cord so that the cores are 
completely protected, and they shall provide the degree of protection against 
dust or moisture in accordance with the classification of the luminaire, 
when the conduit, cable or flexible cord is fitted. 

19.1.7 Cable entries through rigid materials for external flexible cables 
and cords shall have smoothly rounded edges of minimum radius 0-5 mm. 

19.1.8 If, in Class 11 luminaires, in adjustable luminaires or in portable 
luminaires other than those for wall mounting, a flexible cable or cord 
where entering or leaving the luminaire passes through accessible metal 
parts or tlu'ough metal parts in contact with accessible metal parts, the 
opening shall be provided with a tough bushing of insulating material 
having smoothly rounded edges, so fixed that it cannot easily by removed. 
Bushings which deteriorate with age (for example, rubber) shall not be 
used in openings with sharp edges. 

Easily removable bushings are described as bushings which can be 
pulled off the cable with the bare hand or by pulling the actual cable, and 
bushings screwed into luminaires which are not secured or fastened with a 
lock nut or appropriate adhesive, for example, a self-hardening resin. 

If tubes or other guards are provided for the protection of flexible 
cables or cords at the entry to the luminaire they shall be of insulating 
materials. 

18 



IS: 10322 (P«rt2). 1982 

Helical metal springs and similar components, even when covered 
with insulated material, are not guards. 

Compliance shall be checked by inspection. 

19.1.9 Bushings which screw into the luminaire shall be locked in 
position. If bushings are fixed with an adhesive, it shall be of the self- 
hardening resin type. 

Compliance shall be checked by inspection. 

19.1.10 Luminaires provided with or designed for use with non-detach- 
able flexible cables or cords shall have a cord anchorage such that the 
conductors are relieved from strain, including twisting, where they are 
connected to the terminals, and such that their covering is protected from 
abrasion. It shall be clear how the relief from strain and the prevention 
of twisting is intended to be effected. 

It shall not be possible to push the flexible cord or cable into the 
luminaire to such an extent that the cable or cord is subjected to undue 
mechanical or thermal stress. Methods, such as tying the ends with 
string shall not be used. 

Cord anchorage shall be of insulating material or be provided with a 
fixed insulating lining if an insulation fault on the cable or cord could 
make accessible metal parts live. This requirement does not apply to 
luminaires for wall mounting and to other luminaires provided with a 
sheathed flexible cable or cord that is* unlikely to be stressed at the cord 
anchorage at any time during its life. 

Cord anchorages shall be so designed that : 

a) At least one part is fixed to, or is integral with, the luminaire; 
a cord anchorage is described as fixed to or held by the luminaire; 

b) if this is actually the case when the wiring is inserted and the 
luminaire is completely assembled; 

c) They are suitable for the different types of flexible cables or cords 
which may be connected to the luminaire; 

d) They do not damage the cable or cord and they are unlikely to be 
damaged when they are tightened or loosened in normal use; and 

e) The whole flexible cable or cord with its covering, if any, may be 
mounted into the cord anchorage. 

Glands shall not be used as cord anchorages in portable or adjustable 
luminaires, unless they have provision for clamping all types and sizes of 
cables and cords which might be used for the supply connection. 
Achoragcs of labyrinth type may be used if it is evident from the design 
or by means of suitable marking how the flexible cable or cord is to be 
mounted. 

19 



IS: 10322 (Part 2)- 19S2 

19.1.10.1 Test : Compliance shall be checked by inspection and by 
the following tests which are made with the cable which is fitted to the 
limiineure as delivered. 

The conductors are introduced into the terminals and the terminal 
screws, if any, arc tightened just sufficiently to prevent the conductors from 
easily changing their position. 

The cord anchorage is used in the normal manner, clamping screws, 
if any, being tightened with a torque two-third of that specified in Table 4, 

After this prei>aration, it shall not be possible to push the cable or 
cord into the luminaire in such a way as to cause movement of the cable or 
cord at the termitials, or to cause the cable or cord to come into contact 
with moving parts or fjarts which operate at a temperature higher than 
that permissible for the insulation of the conductors. 

The cable or cord is then subjected 100 times to a pull of the value 
shown in Table 4. The pulls are applied without jerks, each time for 1 
second. The measurement of the longitudinal displacement of the cable or 
cord is made during this test. A mark is made on the cable or cord at a 
distance of approximately 20 mm from the cord anchorage while it is 
subjected to the first puU and during the 100th pull the mark shall not 
have been displaced by more than 2 mm. 

The cable or cord shall then be subjected to a torque of the value 
shown in Table 4. 

During and after the above tests, the conductors shall not have 
moved noticeably in the terminals and the cable or cord shall not be 
damaged. 



TABI.K 4 TEST FOR CORD ANCHORAGE 




Total Nomdial G»oit-SK<moNAL 
Ak«a of All Condvotoiii 

ToOETHtR 

mm** 


Pull 
N 


TOXQUB 

Nm 


(I) 


(2) 


(3) 


Up to Rnd including 1*5 


60 


0*15 


Over 1-5 up to and including 3 


60 


0*25 


Over 3 up to and including 5 


80 


0-35 


Over 5 up to and indudtng 8 


120 


O'SS 



19J,11 If external wiring passes into the luminaire, it shall comply with 
the appropriate requirements for internal wiring. 

19.1,11.1 Test — Compliance shall be checked by the tests of 19.2. 
20 



IS:103M(P«rt2)-19M 

19.1*12 Fixed luminaircs for looping-in shall be provided with terminals 
intended for raaintaioing the electrical continuity of supply cables feeding 
the luminaires but not terminating in it. 

Compliance shall be checked by inspection. 

19.1.13 The ends of flexible stranded conductors may be tinned but shall 
not have additional solder applied unless a means is provided of ensuring 
that clamped connections cannot work loose owing to cold flow of the 
solder. 

This requirement is met when spring terminals are used. Securing 
the clamping screws is not an adequate means of preventing the connection 
of soldered strands from working loose owing to cold flow of the solder. 

19.2 Internal Wtrhig 

19.2.1 Internal wiring shall be made with conductors of suitable size and 
type with nominal cross-sections not less than 0-5 mm* and a minimum 
nominal insulation thickness of 0*6 mm if of rubber or PVC. However, for 
some types of decorative luminaires, such as chandeliers, in which the space 
provided for the internal wiring may be severely restricted, conductors with 
a minimum nominal cross sectional area of 0*4 mm* and a mioimum 
insulation thickness of 0*5 mm may be used. The wiring shall be insulated 
with a material capable of withstanding the maximum temperature to 
which it is subjected in normal use, without deterioration capable of 
affecting the safety of the luminaire when properly installed and connected 
to the supply. Sleeves to protect hot spots are suitable. If conductors 
whose insulation is coloured green-yellow are used for internal wiring, they 
shall be reserved for making earth connections only. 

If internal wiring of fixed luminaires for looping-in or through-wiring 
acts as part of the fixed wiring, such wiring shall be copper conductors 
with not less than 1*5 nun* cross-sectional area. 

19.2.1.1 Test — Compliance shall be checked by inspection after the 
temperature rise and heatmg tests Specified in Part 4 of this standard. 

19.2.2 Internal wiring shall be so situated or protected that it cannot be 
damaged by sharp edges, rivets, screws and similar components or by 
moving parts of switches, joints, raising and lowering devices, telescopic 
tubes and similar parts. Wiring shall not be twisted through an angle 
exceeding 360*. 

19.2.2.1 7Vj/— Compliance shall be checked by inspection and by the 
tests of 14*4 to 14.6. 

19.2.3 If in Class 11 luminaires, in adjustable luminaires or in portable 
luminaires other than those for wall mounting, internal wiring passes 
through accessible metal parts through metal parts in contact with accessi- 
ble metal parts, the opening shall be provided with a tough bushing of 

21 



IS:10322(P«rt2)-1982 

insulating material, having rounded edges, so fixed that it cannot easily be 
removed. Bushings of material likely to deteriorate with age ( for example, 
rubber and the like ) shall not be used in openings with sharp edges. 

Easily removable bushings are described as bushings which can be 
pulled off the cable with the bare hand or by pulling the actual cable, and 
bushings screwed into luminaires which are not secured or fastened with a 
lock nut or appropriate adhesive, for example, a self-hardening resin. 

If the cable entry openings have smoothy rounded edges and the 
internal wiring is not required to be moved in service, this requirement 
is met by the use of separate protective sheath over a cable that has no 
special protective sheath or by using a cable which incorporates a protective 
sheath. 

19.2.4 Joints and junctions in internal wiring, excluding terminations on 
components, shall be easily accessible and shall be provided with an 
insulating covering no less effective than the insulation of the wiring. 

19.2.5 Tcjr— Compliance with the requirements of 19.2.3 and 19.2,4 shall 
be checked by inspection. 

19.2.6 Where internal passes out of the luminaire and the design in such 
that the wiring may be subject to strain, the requirements for external 
wiring apply. The requirements for external wiring do not apply to internal 
wiring outside the luminaire if the length outside the limiinaire is less than 
80 mm. 

19.2.6.1 Te^r— Compliance shall be checked by the tests specified 
in 19,1.8. 

19.2.7 Wiring of adjustable luminaires shall be fixed by means of wire 
carriers, clips or similar parts of insulating material at all places where it 
might otherwise rub against metal parts in the normal movement of the 
luminaire in such a way that the insulation may be damaged. 

Compliance shall be checked by inspection. 

19.2.8 The ends of flexible stranded conductors may be tinned but shall 
not have additional solder applied unless a means is provided of ensuring 
that clamped connections cannot work loose owing to cold flow of the 
solder. 

This requirement is satisfied when spring terminals are used. Securing 
the clamping screws is not an adequate means or preventing the connection 
of soldered strands from working loose owing to cold flow of the solder. 

20. PROVISION FOR EARTHING 

20.1 ProvisioD for Earthing 

20.1.1 Metal parts of Class I luminaires, which are accessible when the 
luminaire has been mounted or is opened for replacement of a lamp or 

22 



IS: 10322 (Part 2). 1983 

replaceable starter or for cleaning purposes and which may become live 
in the event of an insulation fault, shall be permanently and reliably 
connected to an earthing terminal or earthing contact. 

Metal parts screened from live parts by metal parts which are 
connected to the earthing terminal or earthing contact, . and metal parts 
separated from live parts by double insulation or by reinforced insulation, 
are not, for the purpose of this requirement, regarded as likely to become 
live in the event of an insulation fault. 

Metal parts of luminaires, which are not accessible when the 
luminaire has been mounted but are liable to come into contact with the 
supporting surface, shall be permanently and reliably connected to an 
earthing terminal. 

The earthing of starters and lamp caps is not a requirement but 
earthing of lamp caps may be necessary as a starting aid. 

The earthing connections shall be of low resistance. 

Spaced threaded screws may be used to provide earthing continuity, 
provided that it is not necessary to disturb the connection in normal use 
and that at least two screws are used for each connection. Thread-forming 
screws may be used to provide earthing continuity if they comply with the 
requirements for screw terminals {^see Part 3 of this standard ). 

20.1.2 Surface in adjustable joints, telescopic tubes etc. providing 
continuity, shall be such that a good electrical contact is ensured. 

20.1.3 Test — CompUance with the requirements of 20.1.1 and 20.1.2 shall 
be checked by inspection and by the following test : 

A current of at least 10 A, derived from a source with a no-load 
voltage not exceeding 12 V, shall be passed between the earthing terminal 
or earthing contact and each of the accessible metal parts in turn. The 
vohage drop between the earthing terminal or earthing contact and the 
accessible metal part shall be measured and the resistance calculated from 
the current and the voltage drop. In no case shall the resistance exceed 
0-5 o. 

20.1.4 Earthing terminals shall comply with the requirements of Part 3 
of this standard. Their clamping means shall be adequately locked 
against accidental loosening. 

For screw terminals, it shall not be possible to loosen the clamping 
means by hand. 

For screwless terminals, it shall not be possible to loosen the clamp- 
ing means unintentionally. 

23 



IS: 10322 (Part 2). 1982 

20.1.4.1 Test — Compliance shall be checked by inspectioa, by manual 
test and by the tests specified in Part 3 of this standard. 

NoT» — In general, the designs commonly used for current-carrying terminals 
provide sufficient resilience to comply with thu requirement; for other designs, special 
provisions^ such as the use of the adequately resilient part which is not likely to be 
removed inadvertently may be necessary, 

20.1.5 For a luminaire provided with a connector socket for a mains 
supply, the earth contact shall be an integral part of the socket. 

20.1.6 For a luminaire to be connected to supply cables or provided with 
a non-detachable flexible cord or cable, the earth terminal shall be adjacent 
to the main terminals. 

20.1.7 All parts of an earth terminal shall be such as to minimize the 
danger of electrolytic corrosion resulting from contact with the earth 
conductor or any other metal in contact with them. 

20.1.8 Either the screw or the other part of the earth terminal shall be 
made of brass or other non-rusting metal or a material with a non-rusting 
surface and the contact surfaces shall be bare metal 

20.1.9 Tt^^r — Compliance with the requirements of 20.1.5 to 20.1,8 shall 
be checked by inspection and by manual test. 

20.1.10 If a fixed Class II luminaire designed for looping-in is provided 
with an internal terminal for maintaining the electrical continuity of an 
earthing conductor not terminating in the luminaire, this terminal shall be 
insulated from accessible metal parts by double insulation or reinforced 
insulation. 

Compliance shall be checked by inspection. 

20.1.11 When a Class I luminaire is supplied with an attached flexible 
cord, this cord shall have an earthing core coloured grecn-and^yellow. The 
green-and-yellow core of a flexible cable or cord shall be connected to the 
earthing terminal of the luminaire and to the earthing contact of the plug 
if one is attached. 

Any conductor* either internal or external, identified by the green/ 
yellow colour combination shall not be connected to terminal other than 
earthing terminals. 

Compliance shall be checked by inspection. 
21. PROTECTION AGAINST ELECTRIC SHOCK 

21.1 Luminaires shall be so constructed that their live parts are not 
accessible when the luminaire has been installed and wired as in normal 
use, and when it is opened as necessary for replacing lamps or (replaceable) 
starters, even if the operation cannot be achieved by hand. 

24 



IS: 10322 (Part 2)- 19SZ 

Protection against electric shock shall be independent of the position 
of mounting and adjustment of the luminaire, and shall be maintained after 
removal of all parts which can be removed by hand, except lamps and 
shrouds of Edison and bayonet lampholdcrs. Covers in fixed luminaires, 
other than tungsten filament lamp luminaires, which cannot be removed by 
single action with one hand, are not removed. However, covers which have 
to be removed for changing lamps or starters are removed for this test. 

2i.2 For portable luminaires, protection against electric shock shall also 
be maintained after movable parts of the luminaires have been placed in 
the most unfavourable position, which can be affected by hand. 

21.3 Metal parts of Class 11 luminaires which are insulated from live parts 
by basic insulation only are live parts for the purpose of this standard, 
ITiis applies also to starters and non-current carrying parts of lamp caps, if 
they are accessible other than when the luminaire is open for lamp or 
starter changing. 

For Class II luminaires, glass bulbs are not required to have further 
protection against electric shock. If glass bowls and other protective 
glasses have to be removed when the lamp is replaced or if they do not 
withstand the test of Part 4 of this standard, they shall not be used as 
supplementary insulation. 

21.4 Portable luminaires for connection to the supply by means of a non- 
detachable flexible cord and plug shall have protection against electric 
shock which is independent of the supporting surface. 

For portable luminaires, terminal blocks shall be completely 
covered. 

21.5 Compliance with the requirements of 21.1 to 21.4 shall be checked by 
inspection and if necessary by a test with the standards test finger as shown 
in Fig. 3. 

This finger shall be applied to every possible position, if necessary 
with a force of 10 N, an electrical indicator being used to show contact 
with live parts. Movable parts, including shades, shall be placed in the 
most unfavourable position by hand; if of metal they shall not touch live 
parts of the luminaire or of the lamps. 

Note —It is recommended tfakt a Ump be used for the indication of contact and 
that the voltage ihould be not Icti than 40 V. 

21.6 Covers and other parts providing protection against electric shock 
shall have adequate mechanical strength and shall be reliably secured so 
that they shall not work loose with normal handling. 

21.6.1 Test — Compliance shall be checked by inspection, by manual test 
and by the tests specified in 21.7. 

25 



IS: 10321 (Part 2). 1983 



INSULATINO MAieitlAl 
BO- 









SECTION VV 
lENLARCeOI 



SECTION ZZ 
(ENLARGCOI 



Fig. 3 Standard Test Finger 

21.7 Luminaties (other than those mentioned below) incorporating a 
capacitor of capacitance exceeding 0*5;tF shall be provideld with a discharge 
device so that the voltage across the capacitor 1 minute after disconnection 
of the luminaire from the source of supply at rated voltage, does not exceed 
50 V. 

21.7.1 Luminaires designed to be connected to the supply by means of 
a plug and incorporating a capacitance exceeding 0*1 ^F (or 0-25 fxf for 
luminaires with a rated voltage less than 150 V ) shall be provided with a 
discharge device so that 1 second after disconnection* the voltage between 
the pins of the plugs does not exceed 34 V. 

21.7^ The discharge device (for all types of luminaire) may be incorpora- 
ted on or within the capacitor or mounted separately within the luminaire. 



26 



INDIAN STANDARDS 
ON 
ILLUMINATING ENGINEERING 

IS: 

1777-1978 Industrial lighting 6tUng» with metal reflcctori (first rtvision ^ 

1885 (PartXVI/Scc 1 )-196S Elcctrotecbnical vocabulary: Part XVI Lighting: Section 1 

General aipcct^ 
1885 (PartXVI/Scc2)-1969 Electrotechnical vocabulary: Part XVI Lighting: Section 2 

General iUumtnation, lighting fittings and lighting for traffic and signalling 
1913 (Part I)-1978 General and safety requirements for luminaircsi Part I Tubular 

fluorescent lamps ( stcond revision ) 
1944 ( Parts I & II )-.970 Code of practice for lighting of public thoroughfares 

( Part V )-l981 Part V Lighting for grade separated junctions, bridges and elevated 

roads ( Group D ) 
( Part VI)-t981 Part VI Lighting for town and city centres and civic importance 

( Group E ) 
( Part VII )-!9Bl Part Vll Lighting for roads with special requirements ( Group F ) 
1947-1986 Flood lights (first reviiitn) 
2149-1970 Luminaires for street lighting (first rtPtsUn ) 
2206 (Part I )-1962 Flameproof electriclighting fittings: Part I Well-glass and bulkhead 

2206 (Part 11 )-1976 Flameproof electric lighting fittings: Part II Fittings using glass 

tubes 
2493-1963 Well-glass lighting fittings for use underground in mines (non-flameproof 

type) 
2672-1966 Code of practice for library lighting 
3287-1965 IndusUiai lighting fittings with plastic reflectors 
3528-1966 Waterproof clcctiic lighting fittings 
3553-1966 Watertight electric lighting fittings 
3646: Code of practice for interior illumination: 

( Part I )-1966 Principles for good lighting and aspects of design 

( Part 11 )-1966 Schedule for values of illumination and glare index 

( Part in )-1966 Calculation of coefficients of utilization by the BZ method 
4012-1967 Dust-proof electric lighting fittings 
4013-1967 Dust-tight eleculc lighting fitttnn 
4347-1967 Code of pracdce for hospital lighdng 
5077-1969 Decorative lighting outfits 

6585-1972 Screwlesi terminal and electrical connections for lighting fittings 
6665 -1972 Code of practice for industrial lighting 
7537-1974 Road traflfic singnal* 

7569-1981 Cast acrylic sheets for use in luminaires (first noithn ) 
7678-1975 Method of photometric testing of incandescent type luminaires for general 

lighting service 
7785: Elevated type aerodrome lighting fittings: 

( Part I )-1975 General rcquiremenU 

(Partll ).1976 Fixed focus high intensity bi-directional runway edge lighting 
fittings 

t Pa rt /II }-1976 Low intensity runway edge lighting fittings 

( Part 7V/Sec 1 )-1981 Angle of approach, lighting section 1 Visual approach 
slope indicators 

< Part V/Sec 1 )-1981 Approach lighting fitthigs. Section 1 High intensity elevated 
approach lighting fittings 
8030-1976 Luminaires for hospitals 
8224-1976 Electric lighting fittings for division 2 areas 
9583-1981 Emergency lighting units 



