**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 13270 (1992) : Test for gases by orsat and 
chromatographic methods [CHD 32: Environmental Protection 
and Waste Management] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Standard 

TEST FOR GASES BY ORSAT AND 
CHROMATOGRAPHIC METHODS — 

METHODS 



1813270:1992 

( Reaffirmed 2003 ) 



UDC 543-27 : 543-54 



© BIS 1992 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 

March 1992 Price Group 4 



Environmental Protection Sectional Committee, CHD 012 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard w£s adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Environmental Protection Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division 
Council. 



Orsat analysis and chromatographic gas analysis are commonly used, 
advantages and disadvantages. These are listed below: 



Each one has some 



OrsQt Analysis 

Advantages 

Gasometric ( volumetric procedures ) 

1 The equipment required is relatively simple. 

2 It does not require any calibration. 

3 When the analysis is done on an infrequent 
basis^ it is very useful. 

4 Simple to operate. 



Disadvantages 

1 Errors may be due to collection storage and 
handhng of samples. 

2 Unless special care is taken in the collec- 
tion of samples contamination by air 

occurs. 

3 Mercury is an ideal c-onfining liquid/fluid 
because of the solubility of all gases in it. 
But practically it cannot be used due to 
great density and cost. Hence saturated 
salt/water is used for ordinary purposes. 

4 It cannot measure concentrations of gases 
below 2 percent. 



Chromatographic Analysis 



Gas chromatographic analysis 

1 It has a great advantage of speed. 

2 A gas analysis can be completed in few 
minutes. 

3 It can be used for low range. 

4 The method is suitable for continuous 
analysis, as the instrument needs calibra- 
tion before use. 

1 Instrument must have been previously 
calibrated for each gas of interest. 

2 The oven must have reached a constant 
temperature and the detector must be 
giving stable response. 

3 It is very difficult to carry instrument to 
the site. If the sample is collected in gas 
holder or any other equipment, collection, 
storage or handling becomes a problem. 

4 It requires inert gas cylinder. 



In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final 
value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised)'. 



IS 13270 : 1992 



Indian Standard 



TEST FOR GASES BY ORSAT AND 
CHROMATOGRAPHIC METHODS — 

METHODS 



1 SCOPE 

This standard prescribes the following two 
methods for determination of various gases like 
oxygen, carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, 
nitrogen, hydrocarbon, etc, present in gaseous 
mixtures: 

a) Orsat analysis, and 

b) Gas chromatographic analysis. 

In case of dispute the gas chromatographic 
method shall be the refree method. 



2 REFERENCES 

The Indian Standards listed below are 
necessary adjuncts to this standard: 



Title 



the 



IS No. 


1070: 


1977 


4167; 


; 1980 



Water for general laboratory use 
( second revision ) 

Glossary of terms relating to air 
pollution : 



3 TERMINOLOGY 

For the purpose of this standard, definitions 
given in IS 4167 : 1980 shall apply. 

4 ORSAT ANALYSIS 

4.1 Principle 

Sample gas is contacted successively by a series 
of chemically reactive solutions. Each solution 
removes a specific constituent of the sample gas 
mixture with the corresponding decrease in gas 
volume at each step representative of the volume 
of the specific gas removed. A levelling bulb 
is used to adjust all gas volume measurements 
to atmospheric pressure. Ordinarily, the ana- 
lysis is applied in the field using the portable, 
orsat apparatus to determine the volume com- 
position of carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, 
oxygen, and unsaturated hydrocarbons in the 
gaseous emission from combustion processes. 
Results are usually expressed in volume percent 
of each component gas. Methane and ethane 
shall be determined by fractional combustion 
and nitrogen is calculated by difference. 

4.2 Range and Sensitivity 

The limit of detection for each component is 
:glven as 0*2 percent of the total volume based 
on a lOO'O ml sample. 



4.3 Interferences 

Errors due to physical absorption can be 
minimized by proper air-solution contact allow- 
ing at least 3 minutes as contact time for proper 
equilibrium. Otherwise, no interference is 
observed from components of ordinary com- 
bustion air at levels normally encountered. 
Negligible interference results from the presence 
of hydrogen sulphide, sulphur dioxide and acid 
gases which are absorbed by the caustic solution 
and reported as carbon dioxide. 

4.4 Apparatus 

4.4.1 The apparatus shall consist of the 
conventional orsat type in which volumes are 
made comparable by pressure temperature 
compensator, with a manometer interposed 
between the compensating tube and burette. 

4.4.2 Burette 

The burette employed shall have a 600 mm 
length of the graduated section with a volume 
of 100 ml, graduated at 0'2 ml intervals, each 
graduation to be separated by a distance of 
r2 mm. The burette shall be calibrated by 
weighed volumes of mercury and shall be 
accurate to within O'l ml/ 100 ml delivery and 
to 0'02 ml for each 10 ml intervals. A glass 
levelling bulb is connected with rubber tubing 
to the burette. 

4.4.3 Pipette 

Gas absorption pipettes are placed following 
the gas measuring burette as given in 4*4.3.4 
to 4.4.3.6. 

4.4.3.1 A bubbling pipette containing potassium 
hydroxide. 

CAUTION : AVOID CONTACT TO SKIN 
AND EYES 

4.4.3.2 A bubbling pipette containing activated 
sulphuric acid. 

CAUTION : AVOID CONTACT WITH 
SKIN AND EYES 

4.4.3.3 A distributing tip pipette containing 
alkaline pyrogallol solution. 

4.4.3.4 A slow combustion pipette with plati- 
num spiral. 

4.4.3.5 A bubbling pipette containing potassium 
hydroxide solution, ( Duplicate of 4.4.3.1 ). 

1 



IS 13270 : 1992 



4.4.3.6 A distributing tip pipette containing 
alkaline pyrogallol solution ( Duplicate 
of 4.4.3.3). 

4.4.3.7 These pipettes must possess smooth 
surface which will not entrap gas bubbles, and 
shall be so sufficient as to absorb the following 
gases from the sample after the required number 
of contacts with reagents. 

Gas Number of Contacts 

with Feagents 

Oxygen 4 to 5 

Carbon dioxide 3 

Unsaturated hydrocarbons 3 

4.4.4 Manometer 

The apparatus shall be of reproducibility of 
measurement of 002 ml per single contact or 
0*05 ml on three successive contacts using the 
same reference gas or air. 

4.5 Reagents 

4.5.1 Quality of Reagents 

Unless specified, otherwise, pure chemicals and 
distilled water {see IS 1070:1977) shall be 
employed in tests. 

NOTE — 'Pure chemicals' shall mean chemicals 
that do not contain impurities which affect the 
results of analysis. 

4.5.2 Potassium Hydroxide Solution Saturated 

In 2C0 ml of distilled water, dissolve solid 
potassium hydroxide until excess potassium 
hydroxide remains. Cool the saturated solution 
to at least VC below lowest expected tempera- 
ture at which analysis will be carried out. 
Decant and store the supernate liquid. 

4.5.3 Activated Sulphuric Acid 

Concentrated sulphuric acid containing silver 
sulphate or vanadium pentoxide. 

4.5.4 Alkaline Pyrogallol Solution 

Dissolve 17 g of pyrogallol crystals in 100 ml of 
potassium hydroxide solution ( 4,5.2 ). Store 
under rf fregeration in a glass-stoppered bottle. 

4.5.5 Acidic Copper (//) Chloride Solution 

Dissolve 450 g of copper (II) chloride in 2 500 ml 
of hydrochloric acid ( relative density 1*18 ). If 
this solution appears greenish or black in colour 
after preparation strips or turnings of copper 
shall be added to the solution until a straw- 
yellow coloured liquid is produced on standing. 
Store solution over copper turnings or wire. 



4.5.6 Sodium Hydrate Asbestos Absorbent 

Used when an unusually accurate measure of 
carbon dioxide is required. This absorbent may 
also be used to remove sulphur dioxide for 
a more accurate determination of unsaturated 
hydrocarbons. 

4.5.7 Saturated Salt Solution — 75 percent. 

Contains 30 g of sodium chloride or sodium 
sulphate or both, 5 ml of hydrochloric acid, 
2 drops of methyl red per 100 ml of distilled 
water. 

4.6 Procedure 

4.6.1 Analysis with Portable Apparatus for 
Carbon Dioxide Oxygen and Carbon Monoxide 

The portable orsat apparatus is fitted with a 
metal or wooden carrying case and uses a 
shortened form of burette with three gas absorb- 
ing pipettes. In order, starting from the burette, 
the pipettes are filled with potassium hydroxide, 
pyrogallol and cuprous chloride solution res- 
pectively. After filling the above pipettes to the 
engraved mark with the above solutions and 
before starting the test adjust the level of each 
to atmospheric pressure using the levelling bulb. 
Open the stopcock of the burette to the atmos- 
phere. Raise the levelling bulb until the burette 
fills to the stopcock with salt water ( saturated ). 
Connect the stopcock of the burette to the 
atmosphere to be sampled or to a sample con- 
tainer and fill the burette with sample gas by 
lowering the levelling bulb until the meniscus 
of the water level reads the desired volume in 
the burette ( Fi ). Open the stopcock connecting 
the burette to manifold of the absorbing system 
and also open the stopcock of the potassium 
hydroxide pipette. Pass the gas contained in 
the burette into the potassium hydroxid pipette 
by first raising and then lowering the levelling 
bottle. Repeat until three to five full contacts 
have been made. Return the remainder of the 
gas sample to the burette using the levelling 
bulb-until the level of potassium hydroxide 
solution returns to the engraved mark, and with 
the pipette stopcock clased, again, adjust the 
water level in the burette to atmospheric pres- 
sure using the levelling bulb. Measure the 
volume V2 of theTcmaining gas and record the 
percent carbon dioxide as follows: 



Carbon dioxide, percentage 



100(Ki--F,) 



Similarly, oxygen is removed from the remaining 
gas volume V^ by passing this gas into the 
pyrogallol solution in the second pipette. 
Measurement of the remaining volume, V2 is 
used to calculate the percent oxygen as follows: 

, 100 ( F2 - Fa ) 
Oxygen, percent == ^^— p 



IS 13270 : 1992 



Carbon monoxide is measured by manipulating 
the remaining gas volume V3 as done previously 
to admit this sample into the pipette containing 
copper (II) chloride. However, before returning 
the gas volume K4 to the burette for measure- 
ment, volume Va\s passed once into the potas- 
sium hydroxide pipette to remove any hydro- 
chloric acid vapours evolved from copper (II) 
chloride. 

Carbon monoxide, ^ 100 (V^ — V^) 
percent ~ Ki 

4.6.2 Analysis by Constant Pressure Volumetry 

In the laboratory bench apparatus the burette is 
filled with mercury and enclosed in a water 
jacket. The pipettes are connected to the 
burette by a manifold and a bubbling pipette 
containing sulphuric acid ( 4.4.3.2 ) is used 
together with a slow combustion pipette (4.4.3.4) 
Avhich is equipped with a separate levelling bulb. 
Pipettes (4.4.3.5 and 4,4,3.6 ) are added to the 
system. Results of both absorption and 
combustion analyses are reported. 

4.6.3 Removal of Gases by Absorption Analysis 

Transfer 95 to 100 ml of the sample gas to the 
burette allowing 2 to 3 minutes for attaining 
temperature and humidity equilibrium. Using 
the leveling bulb bring the sample volume to 
atmospheric pressure and read the exact 
volume Vi. 

4.6.3.1 Removal of carbon dioxide ( or acid gases ) 

Displace the gas sample into the manifold and 
then transfer into the potassium hydroxide 
pipette. Return the sample gas to the burette. 
Then contact the potassium hydroxide pipette 
twice, finally returning the sample to the burette 
and allowing 2 to 3 minutes before equilibrating 
the sample to atmospheric pressure with the 
leveling bulb. Then read the volume Fg. 

4.6.3.2 Removal of unsaturated hydrocarbon 

Displace the gas sample from the manometer 
arm and pass twice in and out of the pipette 
containing activated sulphuric acid. Transfer 
the sample to the potassium hydroxide pipette 
return to the sulphuric acid pipette for two 
successive contacts. Finally return to the burette 
for measurement Vs of the gas after standing 
3 minutes in the burette. 

4.6.3.3 Removal of oxygen 

Displace the gas sample from the manometer 
and transfer twice to the pipette containing 
alkaline pyrogallol, then transfer to the potas- 
sium hgdroxide pipette and the sulphuric acid 
pipette in sequence. Finally transfer twice to 
the alkaline pyrogallol pipette and return to the 
burrette for measurement of the residual 
volume (F4). When acid gases, oxygen and 
unsaturated hydrocarbons occur at levels below 



0'5 percent they are best determined using 
reaction tubes rather than pipettes. 

4.6.4 Combustion Analysis 

Prepare nitrogen to be used as a transfer gas by 
absorption of oxygen from uncontaminated air 
by contact with alkaline pyrogallol pipette. Flush 
the manifold with this nitrogen, then transfer 
approximately 40 ml of the pure nitrogen to the 
duplicate potassium hydroxide pipette ( 4.4.3.5 ) 
for storage F5. Transfer approximately 95 ml 
of pure cylinder oxygen Vq to the burette; 
measure and transfer to the slow combustion 
pipette for storage. Let the inert impurities 
shown by the published analysis of this cylinder 
oxygen be represented as ^7- Measure a fresh 
30 to 35 ml of sample gas V^ through the fuming 
sulphuric acid pipette prior to comiDUStion 
analysis. 

With the combustion gas sample contained in 
the burette adjust the pressure in the combustion 
pipette and the burette to atmospheric and with 
the platinum wire glowing dull red open the 
combustion pipette and slowly admit the gas 
sample over the hot platinum wire. Allow a 
full 15 minutes for the first pass of sample into 
the bomb combustion tube. When all of the 
gas sample has been transferred to the combus- 
tion pipette, displace the gas contained in the 
manometer arm through the distributer into the 
combustion pipette. Over a period of about 
5 minutes, return the contents of the combustion 
pipette to the burette until the mercury level is 
just below the platinum spiral, then return the 
gas slowly to the combustion pipette and repeat 
the slow combustion three times. Allow the 
final pass of sample gas in the combustion 
pipette to cool before returning to the burette. 
Measure this residue and record as Kg. 

4.6.4.1 Removal of carbon dioxide produced by 
combustion 

Displace the gas from the manometer and the 
contents sample residue in the burette into the 
duplicate potassium hydroxide pipette ( 4.4.3.5 ) 
three times. Return this sample volume to the 
combustion pipette and then repeat contact with 
the potassium hydroxide solution before return- 
ing to the burette for measurement as Fio. 

4.6.4.2 Removal of excess oxygen after 
combustion 

Dissolve the sample gas from the manometer and 
contact 4 times in the duplicate alkaUne pyro- 
gallol pipette ( 4,4.3.6 ). Then contact once the 
duplicate potassium hydroxide pipette (4.4.3.5 ) 
and pass once through the slow combustion 
pipette before returning to the alkaline pyro- 
gallol pipette. Transfer this residue to the 
burette and measure Vn. 

4.7 Calibration and Standard 

Calibration shall be performed using commer- 
cially purchased oxygen, nitrogen, carbon 



IS 13270 : 1992 



monoxide and specific hydrocarbon gases as the 
appHcation of the method dictates to prepare 
synthetic mixtures for admission into the appa- 
ratus as calibration gas. Such calibration gases 
may be standardized if desired by gas chro- 
matography and/or gravimetric methods. 

4.8 Calculation 

4.8.1 Absorption Analysis 

Carbondioxide, percent = - ^' Z X 100 



Unsaturated hydrocar- 
bons, percent 



(F,- Kb) 



X 100 



Oxygen, percent = ^^ y ^ X 100 

Volvme designations refer to steps indicated 
in 4.6.3 ard designated as follows: 

Vi = initial volume in ml of sample for 
absorption analysis 

y^ = volume in ml of sample after removal 
of carbondioxide ( and the acid gases ) 

Vz = volume in ml of sample after removal 
of unsaturated hydrocarbons 

F4 = volume in ml of sample after removal 
of oxygen 

4.8.2 Combustion Analysis 

Volume designations refer to steps indicated 
in 4.6.4 ard designated as follows: 

Vi = initial volume in ml of sample 

V^ = volume in ml of sample after removal 
of carbondioxide ( and the acid gases ) 

Vz = volume in ml of sample after removal 
of unsaturated hydrocarbons 

F4 — volume in ml of residual gas after 
removal of oxygen. 

Ethane, percent 

10^ 



- 1/3 [ 6O2 - 4 ( rc + CO2 ) ] X -FT" 
Methane, percent 



= 1/3 [7(rC+CO2)-902] X ^ 

where 

Total sample TC = Fe + Fs - F9 

contraction after 
combustion 

Carbondioxide pro- CC?a==F5+F9— Fio— F12 
duced upon 
sample com- 
bustion 

Oxygen consumed 02=Fe— F7+F13 
during com- —( Fio"" Fu ) 

bustion 



Balance nitrogen N^ = Vn—V^—Vf 
after subtraction 
of transfer nitro- 
gen and inert 
impurities in 
oxygen taken 
for combustion 

Other volumes represented: 
Fi8 = ( Fi - Fa ) X -^ 

F,3 = ( F3 - F4 ) X ^ 

y^ = volume in ml of nitrogen taken as 
transfer gas. 

4.9 Precision and Accaracy 

4.9.1 Hydrocarbons 

Since no more than two hydrocarbons may be 
determined simultaneously by this method errors 
may be caused by the presence of other hydro- 
carbons depending upon type and concentration. 
Consequently, it is not proper to express accu- 
racy for individual hydrocarbons although 
relative precision has been determined for the 
most common combustion related hydrocarbons 
exclusive of other hydrocarbon interferences. 



Gas 



Reproducibility ( percent ) 



Different 


Single 


Laboratories 


Laboratory 


and 


and 


Apparatus 


Apparatus 


Unsaturated hydro- — 


001 


carbons as a group 




Methane TO 


0*2 


Ethane 1*0 


0*2 


4.9.2 




Gas Probable Reproducibih 


Ity (percent ) 



Accuracy t ^ v 

Different Single 

Laboratories Laboratory 

and and 

Apparatus Apparatus 

Carbon- 005 005 0*02 

dioxide 

Carbon- 0*1 — — 

monoxide 

Nitrogen 0*6 0*6 O'l 

Oxygen 0*1 to 0*2 01 003 

5 GAS CHROMATOGRAPHIC ANALYSIS 

A dual column/dual thermal conductivity detector 
gas chromatograph is used to separate and 
quantify oxygen, nitrogen, carbon monoxide, 
carbon dioxide and methane in gas samples. 
The sample is introduced as a plug into the 
carrier gas, and after drying in a desiccant tube 
it passes successively through two carefully 



IS 13270 : 1992 



matched gas chromatographic columns. The 
first column contains a very polar stationary 
liquid phase while the second is packed with 
molecular sieve 13-X. Detectors are placed at 
each of the column. The first column retains 
only carbon dioxide which is eluted after passage 
of the rest of the mixture ( the composite peak). 
The first detector thus records two peaks, one 
corresponding to the unresolved oxygen, nitrogen 
methane and/or carbon monoxide and the second 
to carbon dioxide. The gases are swept into 
the molecular sieve column which separates all 
the components. The second detector records 
the elution of oxygen, nitrogen, carbon mono- 
xide and/or methane. The carbon dioxide is 
irreversibly adsorbed on molecular sieve 13-X 
and does not elute. As shown in Fig. 1, the 
retention time of oxygen is suflHciently long to 
allow carbcn dioxide to elute from the polar 
column before the oxygen elutes from the second 
column. 

Peak heights are used in conjunction with 
calibration plots for quantitative measurements. 
Alternatively, electronic integration of peak 
areas may be used. 

The separation is complete in 8'5 minutes. 

5.1 Range and Sensitivity 

The limits of detection with hot wire thermal 
conductivity detectors and heliimi carrier gas 
expressed as ppm of a gas in a 1 ml sample that 
produces a 001 mV signal on a 1 mV recorder, 
are given below: 



Gas 


Limits 


of 


Detection, ppm 


Carbon dioxide 






250 


Oxygen 






300 


Nitrogen 






300 


Carbon monoxide 






500 


Methane 






300 



CO, 



u 



kJ 




5.2 Interferences 

Argon is not separated from oxygen, but is 
present in natural air at 0'9 volume percent. 
For samples with low oxygen concentration, a 
correction may be necessary depending upon 
the preparation of the calibration standards. 

5,2.1 Any compound present in a sample at a 
detectable level which elute from either column 
at a time close to that of component of interest 
is a potential interference. Polar compounds 
including acid gases are strongly retained in 
both columns at ambient temperature and will 
not interfere. Heavier hydrocarbons than 
miethane are retained somewhat by the polar 
column and elute in order of increasing mole- 
cular weight. Hydrogen is not detected using 
helium carrier gas, but may be measured using 
argon carrier gas. 

5.3 Apparatus 

5.3.1 Gas Chromatograph 

Any commercial gas chromatograph equipped 
with dual column fittings, a four channel thermal 
conductivity detector and both a six port gas 
sampling valve and a syringe injection port, may 
be adopted to this analysis. Commercially 
available models designed specifically for this 
analysis are recommended. A schematic diagram 
of one such apparatus is given in Fig. 2. 

5.3.1.1 Detector 

Either tungsten filament or thermister thermal 
conductivity detector elements are suitable. Gold 
plated filaments are resistant to oxidation by 
oxygen. Greatest detector is thermostated 
and controlled at a temperature slightly above 
ambient. 



Sample — 0*5 ml, 5, each component 

Carrier Gas — 40 ml/mm of He 

Attenuation — 32 

Chart Speed — 1/2 inch/mm 

Columns — DEHS & iVIolecuIar Sieve 

Recorder — 1 millivolt 



8 MINUTES 



Fig. 1 Typical Chromatogram 
5 



IS 13270 : 1992 



WERMAL 
COMDUCTIVITY CELL 







SAMPLING 
VALVE 



51 




DRYING 
^\ TUBE 




COLUMN ? COLUMN » 

Fig. 2 Dual Column/Dual Detector GC Schematic 



5.3.1.2 Carrier gas 

A cylinder of purified helium with a two stage 
regulator is required. Flow rat is measured 
at the exit of the second detector with a soap 
film flow meter. 

NOTE — Carrier gas may vary for different use. 

5.3.1.3 Sample introducer 

A six-port gas sampling valve with a 1 ml sample 
loop provides the better precision. Alternatively, 
a 1 ml precision gas-tight syringe with needle 
may be used. 

5.3.1.4 Drying tube 

A tube of 200 ml capacity with gas-tight fittings 
at either end is filled with indicating desiccant 
1*70 mm/850 micron ( 10/20 mesh ). The tube 
is installed between the sample introduction 
system and the first gas chromatography column. 
The desiccant shall be replaced when the 
indicator colour changes from blue to pink. 

5.3.1.5 Gas chromatography columns 

Column number 1 is a 1 800 X 6 mm column 
packed with 30 percent by mass hexamethyl- 
phosphoamide ( HMPA ) on 250/180 micron 
( 60/80 mesh ) chromosorb P. Alternatively the 
column may be packed with 30 percent by mass 
di-2-ethyl-hexyl-sebacate ( DEHS ) or 250/180 
micron ( 60/80 mesh ) chromosorb P. The 
DEHS column has a longer life time than the 
HMPA column, but DEHS does not separate 
ethane and ethylene from carbon dioxide. 

Column number 2 is a 1 950 X 5 ram, column 
packed with 425/250 micron ( 40/60 mesh ) 
molecular sieve 13-X. The columns shall be 
carefully matched to ensure that the retention 



times of the components allow separation of the 
carbon dioxide from the oxygen. 

NOTE — Depending upon the specific use, different 
types of columns arc used. 

5.3.1.6 Temperature 

The columns are operated at room temperature. 
Best precision results when the detector is 
operated slightly above ambient temperature. 

5.3.1.7 Recorder 

Any 1 mV potentiometric strip-chart recorder 
with a chart speed of 2*5 cm/min is suitable. 

5.3.1.8 Electronic integrator 

Any suitable electronic integrator compatible 
with the chromatograph may be used to measure 
peak areas for quantification. 

5.4 Reagents 

5.4.1 Helium — Of high purity grade 
( 99*995 percent ). 

5.4.2 Calibration Standards 

Standard blends encompassing the concentration 
range of components in the samples can be 
obtained from commercial suppliers. 

5.5 Procedure 

5.5.1 Gas Chromatograph 

The carrier gas is turned on and the flow rate 
adjusted to 50 ml/min. The flow should be 
checked periodically. After the gas has been 
flowing for at least 3 min, the thermal conducti- 
vity dectors may be turned on and the currents 



IS 13270 : 1992 



adjusted to the values specified for the instru- 
ments by its manufacturer. About thirty minutes 
are required for instrument stabilization. The 
recorder is turned on and zeroed before samples 
are introduced. 

5.5.2 Injection of Sample 

5.5.2.1 Sampling valve 

The sample loop is flushed with several volumes 
of calibration standard or sample gas. The 
handle is then turned to divert the sample to the 
chromatograph. 

5.5.2.2 Syringe 

Sample is withdrawn from the sample vessel and 
quickly injected, guarding against blow-back 
of the plunger. 

5.5.3 Repetitive Analysis 

A new sample may be analyzed immediately 
after the last peak if the sample has emerged. 
Samples should be analyzed in duplicate. 

5.6 Calibration and Standards 

A standard curve of peak height or peak area 
vs volume percent is prepared for each constitu- 
ent of interest by analyzing the calibration 
standards. The calibration should bracket the 
sample concentrations. Linear plots should 
result. However, in the presence of 5 to 7 per- 
cent carbon dioxide, the calibration for oxygen 
is not Hnear up to 20 percent, but the calibration 
plot may still be used. If the sample source is 
natural air, the result for oxygen may need 
correction for argon present in the sample but 
not separated from the oxygen. If the oxygen 
calibration standard mixtures contain pure 
oxygen dilute with pure nitrogen, the apparent 
volume percent of conductivity detector molar 
response factors for oxygen are sufficiently close 
that no appreciable error will result from assum- 
ing identical relative responses. If the oxygen 
calibration standard mixtures contain natural 



air diluted with pure nitrogen both samples and 
standards contain argon and no correction is 
necessary. 

5.6.1 The standard curves should be checked 
periodically. 

5.6.2 A severe loss in resolution of the carbon 
dioxide composite peaks and/or of the nitrogen/ 
oxygen peaks indicates the need for replacement 
of columns. The polar gas chromatography 
column continuously looses stationary liquid 
phase through volatilization. These vapours are 
adsorbed on the molecular sieve column along 
with the carbon dioxide, which leads to slow 
deterioration of the performance of that column. 
Normally this will happen slowly over a long 
period of time. 

5.7 Calculations 

Concentrations are determined directly from the 
calibration plots. The following conversion 
factors apply at 76 mm Hg and 25''C. 

Gas ( mgjm^ )/ppm 
Carbondioxide 1*80 

Oxygen 1*31 

Nitrogen 1*14 

Carbon monoxide 654 

Methane 1*14 

5.8 Precision and Accuracy 

Accuracy depends upon the availability of 
accurate calibration standards. These may be 
obtained with a certificate of analysis from com- 
mercial suppliers. Precision is controlled by the 
mode of sample introduction, primarily, gas of 
± 0'3 percent. Reproducibility with a 1 ml 
gas-tight syringe is about ± 1*5 percent. Pre- 
cision is also affected by detector drift, which in 
turn depends upon the control of carrier gas, 
flow rate and system, temperature. Standard 
commercial gas chromatographic equipment 
capable of detector temperature control to ± 0*5 
and flow rate control to ± I percent is adequate. 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the proy'morx^ of XhQ Bureau of India?t 
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on 
products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced 
to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, 
testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the pro- 
ducer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to 
that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use 
of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from 
the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bireau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of 
goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in 
any form without the prior psrmission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in 
the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or 
grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright bs addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. 

Rerision of Indian Standards 

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, 
are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in 
possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent 
to BIS giving the following reference : 



Doc : No. CHD 12 ( 9402 ) 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters : 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 



Telegrams : 
( Common 



Regional Offices : 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.LP. Road, Maniktola 
CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 
BOMBAY 400093 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 
COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATL 
HYDERABAD, JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. 
THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Manaksanstha 
to all Offices ) 

Telephone 

f 331 01 31 
1 331 13 75 



37 86 62 

53 38 43 
235 0216 

6 32 92 95 



Printed at Swatantra Bharat Press, Delhi. India 



