**************** 



* i&$z 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 9385-1 (1979): High voltage fuses, Part 1: Current 
limiting fuses [ETD 39: Fuses] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
"Step Out From the Old to the New" 



?&&IiII}g&*±2te 



^\i»i>^/a^> 



\\\«ktc 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR V^ T^TT <sMHI | 3ft ^ft ^FT\ ^f W *T^?TT )f 
Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




• 



• 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



^ *g», 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 9385 ( Part I ) - 1979 

( Reaffirmed 2002 ) 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
HIGH VOLTAGE FUSES 

PART I CURRENT LIMITING FUSES 

( First Reprint JANUARY ig89) 



UQC 6 21 ,3 16, 923. 027. 3 



© Copyright \ 980 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Grl ° October \ 98D 



IS:03*5(PartI)-1979 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
HIGH VOLTAGE FUSES 

PART I CURRENT LIMITING FUSES 

High Voltage Switchgear and Controlgeax Sectional Committee, ETDC 58 

Chairman Representing 

Shri H. M. Pai The Ahmedabad Electricity Co Ltd, Bombay 

Members 

Shri B. S. Reuben ( Alternate to 
Shri H. M. Pai ) 
Shri M. M. Bendre Maharashtra State Electricity Board, Bombay 

Shri K. K. Bose Calcutta Electric Supply Corporation Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri T. K. Ghose ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. Ghandramouli Tata Hydro-Electric Power Supply Co Ltd, 

Bombay 

Smt C. Bauoa ( Alternate ) 
Chief Engineer Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 

Surveyor of Works III ( Alternate) 
Deputy Chief Engineer ( PS ) Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi 

Director ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. L. Garg Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, New 

Delhi 
Shri B. N. Ghosh Bharat Heavy Electiicals Ltd, Bhopal 

Shri G. P. Mittal ( Alternate ) 

Shri A. Raja Rao ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. P. Gupta Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 
Shri Jayant N. Gurjar Kirloskar-Asea Limited, Bangalore 

Shri H. V. J. Iyengar NGEF Limited, Bangalore 

Shri C.S.N. Raju { Alternate ) 
Shri P. M. Joseph Aluminium Industries Limited, Kundara 

Shri C. M. A. Nayar ( Alternate ) 
Shri I. C. Kuppusamy Tamil Nadu Electricity Board, Madras 

Shri S. Pannirbelvam ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. S. Mani Hindustan Brown Boveri Ltd, Bombay 

Shri K. S. Madhavan ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. K, Mukherjeb National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri P. C. Pradhan ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. S. Narasimhan Mysore Electrical Industries Ltd, Bangalore 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1980 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV of 1957) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS: 9385 (Part I)- 1979 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri V. R. Narasimhan Central Power Research Institute, Bangalore 

Shri Anantha Krishnan ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. S . Neoi Jyoti Limited, Vadodara 

Shri R. M. Nanavati ( Alternate ) . , 

Dr G. M. Phadke Indian Electrical Manufacturers' Association, 

Bombay 

Shri J.N. Gurjar (Alternate) 
Shri A. S. Pinto Delhi Electric Supply Undertaking, New Delhi 

Shri S. K. Basu ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. P. Ranade Crompton Greaves Ltd, Bombay 

Shri S. R. Potnis ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. K. Saxena Rural Electrification Corporation Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri G. L. Dua ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. P. Shenoy Bombay Electric Supply and Transport Undertak- 

ing, Bombay 

Shri Y. K. Palvankar ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. P. Sachdev, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Elec tech ) 

Secretary 
Shri K. Ganesh 
Assistant Director ( Elec tech ), ISI 



IS:9385(PartI)-1979 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
HIGH VOLTAGE FUSES 

PARTI CURRENT LIMITING FUSES 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part I ) was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 26 December 1979, after the draft finalized by the High 
Voltage Switchgear and Controlgear Sectional Committee had been 
approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 

0.2 Three classes of high voltage fuses are in general use, namely, the 
expulsion, liquid and high rupturing capacity cartridge types. The most 
common application is on distribution systems up to 33 kV, while the liquid 
and cartridge type fuses are available for use on systems up to 132 kV, 
used largely for protecting voltage transformers. 

0.3 Requirements and tests for high voltage expulsion fuses and similar 
fuses are covered in IS : 5792-1970*. This specification is now being 
brought up to date as to form a part of the present series of specifications 
on high voltage fuses. Subsequent parts of this specification, hence would 
cover: 

Part II Expulsion fuses and similar fuses 

Part III Application guides for high voltage current limiting fuses, 
expulsion fuses and similar fuses 

It is also intended to bring out a standard guide for the determination 
of short-circuit power factor for testing high voltage fuses. 

0.4 As compared to earlier practices, this standard specifies two levels 
( Level 1 and Level 2 ) of severity of impulse withstand voltages. Specific 
guidelines on the applicability and choice of these values are provided in 
Part III of this standard. 

0.5 In the preparation of this standard ( Part I ), considerable assistance 
has been derived from IEC Pub 282- 1 ( 1974 ) 'High voltage fuses: Part 1 
Current limiting fuses' published by the International Electrotechnical 
Commission. 



♦Specification for high voltage expulsion fuses and similar fuses. 

3 



IS:9385(PartI)-1979 

0.6 In order to facilitate comparison with the international standards and 
for ease of reference, the Committee has decided to add in the form of an 
appendix, the major differences between this Indian Standard and the 
corresponding IEC Publication(s) ( see Appendix A ). 

0.7 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing 
the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960* 
The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should 
be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard (Part I) applies to all types of high-voltage current- 
limiting fuses designed for use outdoors or indoors on alternating current 
systems of 50 Hz and of rated voltages exceeding 1 000 V. 

1.2 Some fuses are provided with fuse-links equipped with an indicating 
device or a striker. These fuses come within the scope of this standard, 
but the correct operation of the striker in combination with the tripping 
device of the switching device for which separate or additional requirements 
have to be complied with is outside the scope of this standard. 

Note — This standard refers primarily to three-phase systems with earthed neutral. 
For applications on single-phase systems or three-phase systems with unearthed neutral, 
see Part III of this standard, 

L3 Fuses designed for the protection of single capacitor units within multi- 
unit capacitor banks may have to conform to additional requirements other 
than those specified in this standard. 

1.4 Fuses complying with the standard are to \>q operated under the normal 
conditions of service as detailed in Appendix B. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions in addition 
to those given in IS : 1885 ( Part XVII )-1969t, shall apply. 

2.1 Electrical Characteristics 

2.1.1 Rating — General term employed to designate the characteristic 
values that together define the working conditions upon which the tests are 
based and for which the equipment is designed. 

Note — Examples of rated values usually stated for fuses are voltage, current and 
breaking current. 



•Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 
fEiecirotechnicai vocabulary : Fart XVII Switchgear and controlgear. 

4 



IS:9385(Part I)-1979 

2.1.2 Prospective Current (of a Circuit and with Respect to a Fuse ) — The 
current that woulii flow in the circuit, if the fuse was replaced by a 
conductor of negligible impedance. 

Note — For the method to evaluate and express the prospective current, see 6.5.2.1 
and 6.5.2.2. 

2.1.3 Prospective Breaking Current — The prospective current evaluated at 
a time corresponding to the instant of the initiation of the arc in a fuse 
during a breaking operation. 

Conventions relating to the instant of the initiation of the arc are 
given in 6.5.2.3. 

2.1.4 Cut-Off Current ( of a Fuse ) — The maximum instantaneous value 
of current attained during the breaking operation of a fuse. 

Note — This concept is of particular importance when the fuse operates in such a 
manner that the prospective peak current of the circuit is not reached. 

2.1.5 Breaking Capacity — A value of prospective breaking current that 
a fuse is capable of breaking at a stated voltage under prescribed conditions 
of use and behaviour. 

2.1.6 Pre-arcing Time (Melting Time ) — The time between the commence- 
ment of a current large enough to cause a break in the fuse-element(s) 
and the instant when an arc is initiated. 

2.1.7 Arcing Time — The interval of time between the instant of the 
initiation of the arc and the instant of final arc extinction. 

2.1.8 Operating Time ( Total Clearing Time ) — The sum of the pre-arcing 
time and the arcing time. 

2.1.9 Joule Integral (I 2 1) — The integral of the square of the current 

ti 

over a given time interval: Pt =» I ( i 2 ) dt. 

to 

Note 1 — When considered from the point of view of the circuit protected by a fuse, 
the value of the Joule integral over the operating time of the fuse is referred to a 
specific energy, that is, the energy released as heat in 1 SI of circuit resistance. 

Note 2 — The values of the Joule integral usually stated for fuse-links are pre-arcing 
Joule integral and operating Joule integral extended over the pre-arcing time and the 
operating time respectively. 

2.1.10 Virtual Time — The value of the Joule integral divided by the 
square of the value of the prospective current. 

Note — The values of virtual times usually stated for a fuse-link arc the values of pre- 
arcing time and of operating time. 



IS: 9385 (Part I) -1979 

2.1.11 Time I Current Characteristics — A curve giving the virtual time as 
a function of the rms value of the symmetrical component of the prospec- 
tive current under stated conditions of operation. 

Note — Time/current characteristics usually stated for a fuse-link are referred to the 
pre-arcing time and the operating time. 

2.1.12 Cut-Off Characteristics — A curve giving the value of the cut-off 
current as a function of the value of the prospective current under stated 
conditions of operation. 

Note — In the case of ac, the value of the cut-off current is the maximum value which 
can be reached for any degree of asymmetry of the prospective current In the case of dc, 
the value of the cut-off current is the maximum value reached. 

2.1.13 Recovery Voltage — The voltage which appears across the terminals 
of a fuse after the breaking of the current. 

Note — This voltage may be considered in two successive intervals of time, one 
during which a transient voltage exists, followed by a second one during which the 
power-frequency recovery voltage {see 2.1.13.2) alone exists. 

2.1.13.1 Transient recovery voltage (restriking voltage) (abbreviated 
TRV) —The recovery voltage during the time in which it has a significant 
transient character. 

Note 1 — The transient voltage may be oscillatory or non-oscillatory or a combina- 
tion of these, depending on the characteristics of the circuit and the fuse. It includes the 
voltage shift of the neutral of a polyphase circuit. 

Note 2 — The transient recovery voltage in three-phase circuits is, unless otherwise 
stated, that across the first fuse to clear. 

2.1.13.2 Power frequency recovery voltage (or steady state recovery 
voltage ) — The recovery voltage after the transient voltage phenomena have 
subsided. 

Note — In the case of dc, the steady state recovery voltage is expressed by* the mean 
value where ripple is present. 

2.1.13.3 Prospective transient recovery voltage (of a circuit ) — The 
transient recovery voltage following the breaking of a prospective current 
without any direct component by an ideal switching device. 

Note — The definition assumes that the fuse for which the prospective transient 
recovery voltage is sought, is replaced by an ideal switching device, that is, having in- 
stantaneous transition from zero to infinite impedance at the very instant of zero current 
( that is, at the "natural" current zero), For circuits where the current can follow 
several different paths, for example a polyphase circuit, the definition further assumes 
that the breaking of the current by the ideal switching device takes place only in the 
pole considered. 

2.1.14 Switching Voltage — The maximum instantaneous value of voltage 
which appears across the terminals of a fuse during its operation. 

Note — The switching voltage may be the peak arc voltage or may occur during the 
time of transient reeevery voltage. 



IS:9385(PartI)-1979 

2.1.15 Minimum Breaking Current — A minimum value of prospective 
current that a fuse-link is capable of breaking at a stated vollage under 
prescribed conditions of use and behaviour. 

2.1.16 Power Dissipation ( of a Fuse-Link ) — The power released in a 
fuse-link carrying a stated value of current under prescribed conditions of 
use and behaviour. 

Note — The prescribed conditions of use and behaviour usually include a constant 
rms value of current until steady temperature conditions are reached. 

2.2 Fuses and Their Component Parts ( see Fig. 1 ) 

2.2.1 Fuse — A switching device that, by the fusion of one or more of its 
specially designed and proportioned components, opens the circuit in which 
it is inserted and breaks the current when it exceeds a given value for a 
sufficient time. The fuse comprises all the parts that form the complete 
switching device. 

2.2.2 Terminal — A conducting part of a fuse provided for an electric 
connection to external circuits. 

Note — Terminals may be distinguished according to the kind of circuits for which 
they are intended ( for example main terminal, earth terminal, etc), but also according 
to their design ( for example screw terminal, plug terminal, etc). 

2.2.3 Fuse-Base ( Fuse-Mount ) — The fixed part of a fuse provided with 
terminals for connection to the external circuit. The fuse-base comprises 
all the parts necessary for insulation. 

2.2.4 Fuse-Base Contact ( Fuse-Mount Contact ) — A conducting part of a 
fuse-base, connected to a terminal and intended to engage with a fuse-carrier 
contact or with a fuse-link contact. 

2.2.5 Fuse-Carrier — The movable part of a fuse designed to carry the 
fuse-link. The fuse-carrier does not include the fuse-link. 

2.2.6 Fuse-Carrier Contact — A conducting part of a fuse-carrier connec- 
ted to a fuse-link contact and intended to engage with a fuse-base contact, 

2.2.7 Fuse-Link (Fuse-Unit) — A part of a fuse including the fuse- 
elements) which requires replacement by a new fuse-link after the fuse 
has operated and before the fuse is put back into service. 

2.2.8 Fuse-Link Contact — A conducting part of a fuse-link intended to 
engage with a fuse-base contact or with a fuse-carrier contact. 

2.2.9 Fuse-Element — A part of a fuse designed to melt when the fuse 
operates. 

2.2.10 Indicating Device (Indicator) — A device which is provided to 
indicate at the fuse whether the fuse has operated. 



IS:S385(P*rtI >-1979 

2.2.11 Striker — A mechanical device which is a part of a fuse and which 
operates during the fuse-operation satisfying specified requirements with 
respect to its force and travel. 

Note- — A striker may be vised for the purpose of signalling, indicating and/or tripp- 
ing other apparatus. 



TERMINAL 



STRIKER OR 



INDICATING DEVICE 
FUSE CARRIER 




himippnini . fuse-base contact 




FUSE-CARRIER 

contact 



FUSE-BASE 



Fig. 1 Terminology 



2.3 Additional Terms 



2.3.1 Current-Limiting Fuse-Link — A fuse-link that, during and by its 
operation in a specified current range, limits the current to a substantially 
lower value than the peak value of the prospective current 



8 



iS:9385(PartI)-W9 

2.3.2 Isolating Distance (for a Fuse ) — The shortest distance between 
the fuse-base contacts or any conducting parts connected thereto, measured 
on a fuse with the fuse-link or fuse-carrier removed. 

2.3.3 Homogeneous Series ( of Fuse-Links ) — A series of fuse-links, 
deviating from each other only in such characteristics that, for a given test, 
the testing of one or a reduced number of particular fuse-link(s) of the series 
may be taken as representative of all the fuse-links of the series 
(see 6.5.3.1). 

3. RATINGS AND CHARACTERISTICS 
3.0 List of Ratings and Characteristics 

3.0.1 Ratings 

a) Ratings of the fuse-base 

1) Rated voltage (3.1); 

2) Rated current (3.2); 

3) Rated insulation level ( power-frequency, dry, wet and impulse 
withstand voltages ) ( 3.6 ). 

b) Ratings of the fuse-link 

1) Rated voltage ( 3.1 ), 

2) Rated current (3.2), 

3) Rated breaking current ( 3.3 ), 

4) Rated frequency ( 3.4 ), 

5) Rated minimum breaking current f of back-up fuses ( 3.5 ), 

6) Rated TRV( 3.11). 

3.0.2 Characteristics 

a) Characteristics of the fuse 

1) Temperature-rise limits ( 3.7 ). 

b) Characteristics of the fuse-link 

1) Class (3.5), 

2) Switching voltages ( 3.8 ), 

3) Time/ current characteristics ( 3.9 ), 

4) Cut-off characteristics ( 3.10 ), 

5) Characteristics of the strikers ( 3.12 ). 



IS : 9385 ( Part I ) - 1979 

3.1 Rated Voltage — - A voltage used in the designation of the fuse-base or 
fuse-link, from which the test conditions are determined. 

Note — This rated voltage is equal to the highest voltage for the equipment. 

3.1.1 The rated voltage shall be selected from the values given below: 
3-6, 7:2, 12, 24, 36, 72'5 and 145 kV. 
These correspond to highest system voltage. 

3.2 Rated Current of the Fuse-Base — The current assigned to the fuse-base 
that a clean new fuse base will carry continuously without exceeding specified 
temperature rises when equipped with a fuse-link of the same current rating 
designed to be used in the particular fuse-base connected to the circuit with 
certain specified conductor sizes and lengths, at an ambient air temperature 
of not more than 40*C. 

3.2.1 The rated current of the fuse-base shall be selected from the 
following values: 

10, 25, 63, 100, 200, 400, 630 A. 

3.3 Rated Current in Amperes and Rated Breaking Current of the Fuse-Link 
in Kiloamperes — The current assigned to the fuse-link that a new clean 
fuse-link will carry continuously without exceeding specified temperature 
rises when mounted on a fuse base specified by the manufacturer and 
connected to the circuit with certain specified conductor sizes and lengths, 
at an ambient temperature of not more than 40°C. 

The rated breaking current is the value of the breaking capacity 
specified for a fuse. 

3.3.1 The rated current and the rated breaking current of the fuse-link 
should be selected from the R10 series. For special cases, additional values 
for the rated current of the fuse-link may be selected from the R20 series 
( see IS : 1076-1967* ). 

3.4 Rated Frequency — The frequency for which the fuse has been designed 
and to which the values of the other characteristics correspond. Standard 
value of rated frequency is 50 Hz, 

3.5 Minimum Breaking Current and Class 

3.5.1 Two classes of fuses are recognized according to the range in which 
they x;an be used, back-up fuses and general purpose fuses ( see 4.0.1 and 
4.0.2). In both cases the manufacturer shall indicate the class and for 
back-up fuses the value of the rated minimum breaking current. 



♦Preferred numbers {first revision). 

10 



IS:9385 (Partl)-1979 

3.6 Sated Insulation Level ( of a Fuse-Base ) — The voltage values ( both 
power frequency and impulse) which characterise the insulation of the 
fuse-base with regard to its capability of withstanding the dielectric stresses. 

3.6.1 The insulation level ( power frequency, dry, wet and impulse with- 
stand ) voltages shall be selected from Table 1 shown below. 



Rated 

Voltage 

of THE 

Fuse 



TABLE 1 INSULATION LEVEL VALUES 

Rated Lightning Impulse Withstand Voltage 
( Positive and Negative Polarity ) 



(1) 
kV ( rms ) 

3*6 

7-2 
12 
24 
36 
72-5 



To earth 
and bet- 
ween poles 



(2) 
kV( peak ) 

20 
40 
60 
95 

145 
325 



List 1 

A 



Across the 
isolating 
distance of 
the fuse 
base ( see 
notes ) 

(3) 
kV( peak ) 

23 

46 

70 
110 
165 
375 



List 2 

A 



To earth 
and bet- 
ween poles 



(4) 
kV(peak) 

40 

60 

75 
125 
170 
325 



Across the 
isolating 
distance of 
the fuse 
base ( see 
notes ) 

(5) 
kV( peak ) 

46 

70 

85 
145 
195 
375 



Rated 1 Mm Power 
Frequency With- 
stand Voltage 
( Dry and Wet ) 

i *■ p 

To Earth Across the 
and Bet- Isolating 
ween Poles Distance of 
the Fuse 
Base {see 
Notes ) 

(6) (7) 

kV ( rms ) kV ( rms) 

10 12 

20 23 

28 32 

50 60 

70 80 

140 160 



.^ — 



Full Insulation 



145 



650 



750 



Reduced Insulation Full Re- Full Re- 
in- due- In- duc- 
sula- ed sula- ed 
tion Insu- tion Insu- 
lation lation 

550 630 275 230 315 265 



Note 1 — An isolating insulation level should only be specified for those fuse-bases 
to which isolating properties are assigned. 

Note 2 — The values in this table are based on the following standard reference 
conditions: 

Temperature 27°C, pressure 760 mmHg, and humidity 1 1 g/m 3 of water. 

3,7 Temperature-Rise Limits — The fuse link and the fuse base shall be able 
to carry their rated current continuously without exceeding the limits of 
temperature-rise given in Table 2. 

Note — Where engaging contact surfaces having different coatings, the permissible 
temperatures and temperature-rises shall be as follows: 

a) For bolted contacts and terminals, those of the component having the higher 
values permitted in Table 2. 

bj For spring loaded contacts, those of the component having the lower values per- 
mitted in Table 2. r 



11 



IS : 9385 ( Part I ) - 1979 



TABLE 2 LIMITS OF TEMPERATURE AND TEMPERATURE-RISE FOR 
COMPONENTS AND MATERIALS 

( Clause 3.7 ) 



Component or Material 



(1) 



Maximum Value of 

-A 



Temperature 
(2) 

°C 



Temperature-Rise 
(3) 



75 35 

105 65 

95 55 

See Note 1 

90 50 

105 65 

See Note 1 



Copper contacts in air: 

a) Spring loaded contacts: 

— bare 
*— silver-coated 

— tin-coated 

— other coatings 

b) Bolted contacts: 

— bare 

— silver or tin-coated 

— other coatings 

Copper contacts in oil: 

— bare 

— silver, tin or nickel-coated 

— other coatings 
Bolted terminals in air: 

■ — bare 

— silver or tin-coated 

— other coatings 
Metal parts acting as springs 

Insulating materials or metal parts in contact with 
insulating materials of the following classes: * 
Class A 
E 
B 
F 
H 
C 

Note 1 — If the manufacturer uses coatings other than those indicated in Table 3, 
the properties of those materials shall be taken into consideration. 

Note 2 — The temperature or the temperature-rise shall not reach such a value that 
the elasticity of the metal is changed. 

Note 3 — Limited by the requirement not to cause any damage to surrounding 
parts. 

Note 4 — For fuses used in enclosures, see Part III of this standard. 

•Classes according to IS: 1271-1958 'Specification for the classification of materials 
for the insulation of electrical machinery and apparatus in relation to their thermal stability 
in service'. 



80 
90 


See Note 1 


40 
50 


90 
105 


See Note 1 
See Note 2 


50 
65 


105 
120 
130 
155 
180 


See Note 3 


65 

80 

90 

115 

140 



12 



IS :9385(PartI)-1979 

3.8 Switching Voltages— On request, the manufacturers shall indicate the 
maximum value of the switching voltages as determined in the breaking 
tests ( see 6.5 ). The values of switching voltages during operation in test 
duties 1, 2 and 3 shall not exceed those given in Table 3. 



TABLE 3 SWITCHING VOLTAGES 

Rated Voltage Switching Voltage 

(1) (2) 

k V k V ( Max ) 

3-6 12 

7*2 23 

12 38 

24 75 

36 112 

72-5 226 

145 Under consideration 

3.9 Time/Current Characteristics — The manufacturer shall make avail- 
able curves from the data determined by the time/current characteristics 
type tests specified in 6.6.2. 

The time/current characteristics shall be presented with current as 
abscissa and time as ordinate. Logarithmic scales shall be used on botlr 
co-ordinate axes. 

The curves shall show: 

a) the relation between the virtual pre-arcing time and the prospec- 
tive current. 

b) the basis of current, whether mean or minimum. If mean current 
values are used, the tolerance shall not exceed ± 20 percent. If 
minimum values are used, the tolerance shall not exceed +50 
percent. 

c) the type and rating of the fuse-link to which the curve data apply. 

d) the time-range as specified in 6.6.2.2. For back-up fuses, a dotted 
line shall be plotted from minimum breaking current to 600 
seconds if the minimum breaking current corresponds to a time 
less than 600 seconds. 

13 



IS:9385(PartI)-1979 

3.10 Cut-Off Characteristics — The manufacturer shall indicate the upper 
limit of the cut-off current corresponding to each value of prospective 
breaking current up to the rated breaking capacity of the fuse under 
specified conditions determined as part of the breaking type tests specified 
in 6.5. 

It shall be stated whether the characteristic applies to 50 Hz. 

3.11 Rated Transient Recovery Voltage ( Rated TRV ) — The rated transient 
recovery voltage related to the rated breaking current ( see 3.3 ) is the 
reference voltage which constitutes the upper limit of the prospective 
transient recovery voltage of circuits which the fuse shall be capable of 
breaking in the event of a short circuit. 

3.11.1 Representation of TRV — The waveform of transient recovery 
voltage varies according to the arrangement of the actual circuits. 

For fuses covered by the scope of this standard, the transient 
recovery voltage approximates to a damped single-frequency oscillation. 
This waveform is adequately described by an envelope consisting of two 
line segments defined by means of two parameters ( reference line ) {see 
Appendix C ). 

The influence of local capacitance on the source side of the fuse 
produces a slower rate-of-rise of the voltage during the first few micro- 
seconds of the TRV. This is taken into account by introducing a time 
delay. 

This representation applies both to rated and to other specified 
transient recovery voltages which are represented by two parameter 
reference lines together with delay lines. 

3.11.2 Representation of Rated TRV — The following parameters are 
used for the representation of the rated TRV ( see also Fig. 8 ): 

u Q — > TRV peak voltage in kV, and 

f a *= time in ps to voltage u c . 

A delay line starting on the time axis at the rated time delay fa running 
parallel to the first section of the reference line and terminating at a 
specified voltage u' ( time co-ordinate t' ). 

3.11.3 Standard Values of Rated TRV— Standard values of rated TRV 
of fuses are given in Table 4. 

The values given in the tables are prospective values and taken into 
account depression of recovery voltage. 

In the case of single-phase systems or where fuses are for use in an 
installation having more severe conditions, the values shall be subject to 
agreement between the manufacturer and the user. 

14 



IS: 9385 (Part I). 1979 





TABLE 4 


STANDARD VALUES OF RATED TRV* 












(Clause 3.11.3) 






Rated 
Voltage* 


Basic Parameters 

■ A 




Derived Values 

_. -JL 




Peak 

Voltage 


._ . _. — ^ 
Time 
Co-ordinate 


t — " 

Time 
Delay 
t 


Voltage 

Co-ordinate 

t 


Time 
Co-ordinate 
§ 


Rate of 
Rise 


u, 


u 




'8 


ta 


u' 


*' 


uoltt 


(1) 


(2) 




(3) 


(4) 


(5) 


(6) 


(7) 


kV 


kV 




PS 


fts 


kV 


Ps 


kV/jw 


36 


6-2 




40 


6 


2*06 


19-4 


0'154 


7-2 


12-4 




52 


78 


4-1 


25 


0-238 


12 


206 




60 


9 


6-9 


29 


0-345 


24 


41 




88 


13-2 


13-8 


42'5 


0*47 


36 


62 




108 


16*2 


20-6 


52 


0*57 


72-5 


124 




168 


84 


41-5 


64 


0-74 



♦This table gives representation of TRV by two parameters. For rated voltage 145 kV 
( in general, for voltages above 72*5 kV ) four parameters are used. For values of voltage 
and time co-ordinates for 145 kV systems, reference shall be made to IS : 2516 (Part I/Sec 3)- 
1972 'Alternating current circuit-breakers : Part I Requirements, Section 3 Voltages above 
11 kV. 

a* - 1*4 x 1*5 X y/~W Ut t*i - 0-15 t 3 \ , f/ n ., kv 

%u' « l/34i §*' « ( 0-15 -f- 1/3 ) * 8 / ior Ut < ll 5 kV 

PZ ?Q-U\ l^t,}** *> 72-5W 

The rated transient recovery voltage corresponding to the rated 
breaking current is vised for testing at breaking currents equal to the rated 
value with the permitted deviation given in 6.5.1.2(a). For testing at 
breaking current less than the rated value, other values of transient recovery 
voltage are specified [ see 6.5.1.2(b) ]. 

3.12 Characteristics of Strikers — The strikers shall have the characteristics 
according to the three types given in Table 5. 

Strikers of fuse-links are operated by either a charged spring or an 
explosive charge. 

Strikers may be classified by the amount of energy they are able to 
deliver to a mechanical switching device or a signalling device between 
two specified points on their travel and by a minimum withstand force. 

The withstand force is the characteristic which prevents the return of 
the striker, after operation, to less than the minimum actual travel, when a 
static external force is applied. 

15 



IS :9385 (Parti)- 1979 



TABLE 5 CHARACTERISTICS OF STRIKERS 

{Clauses 3.12, A-0 and E-3.1 ) 

Type Energy Free Further Travel Actual Minimum 

t a ^ Travel During Which Travel Withstand 

Min Max Energy Must , * — » Force 

be Delivered Min Max 

(0 (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) 

J J mm mm mm mm N 

Light 0*05 0-5 2 8 10 20 Not ap- 

plicable 
Medium 0-5 1*5 4 16 20 40 20 

Heavy 0*5 3 4 6 10 16 40 

4. STANDARD CONDITIONS OF USE AND BEHAVIOUR 

4.0 Two classes of current-limiting fuses are defined according to the range 
in which they can be used: 

a) back-up fuses, and 

b) general-purpose fuses. 

4.0.1 Back- Up Fuse — A current-limiting fuse capable of breaking, 
under specified conditions of use and behaviour, all currents from the rated 
breaking current down to the rated minimum breaking current. 

Back-up fuses are generally associated with other apparatus such as a 
switch. 

4.0.2 General Purpose Fuse — A current-limiting fuse capable of break- 
ing, under specified conditions of use and behaviour, all currents from the 
rated breaking current down to the current that causes melting of the fuse- 
element in 1 hour. 

4.1 Breaking Characteristics 

4.1.1 General — When used in systems with service voltages less than the 
rated voltage of the fuse, the breaking capacity in kiloamperes is not less 
than the rated breaking current. 

Current-limiting fuses should not be used in systems of voltages less 
than their rated voltage without regard to the switching voltage produced 
by the fuse during operation in relation to the insulation level. 

No tests have been specified to prove the performance of the fuse in 
the range of currents below that specified in the breaking tests with respect 
to its capability to withstand the current of every possible time/current 
combination without deterioration leading to either premature operation 
or failure ( see Part III of this standard ). 

16 



IS: 9385 (Parti) -1979 

4.1.2 Standard Conditions vf Use with Respect to Breaking Capacity — 
Fuses shall be capable of breaking correctly any value of prospective 
current, irrespective of the possible dc component, provided that: 

a) the ac component is not lower than the minimum breaking current 
and not higher than the rated breaking current; 

b) the power-frequency recovery voltage is not higher than that 
specified in 6.5.2.4 (for special conditions, see Part HI of this 
standard ) ; 

c) the prospective transient recovery voltage is within the limits 
represented by the tests specified in 6.5.1.2; 

d) the frequency is between 48 Hz and 52 Hz; 

e) the power factor is not lower than that represented by the teSts 
specified in 6.5.2.4; and 

f) the prospective TRV wave, while passing through the delay line 
and not recrossing it, does not exceed the reference line with the 
parameters specified in 6.5.1.2. 

Note — As regards the prospective TRV characteristics, the time co- 
ordinate f, is not significant for the behaviour of fuses ( except for those fuses, 
which cause high arc voltage peaks immediately after arc initiations, 
see 6.5.1.2 ). 

4.1.3 Standard Conditions of Behaviour with Respect to Breaking Capa- 
city — According to the conditions of use indicated in 4.1.2, the behaviour 
of the fuse shall be as follows: 

a) A powder-filled fuse-link shall not emit flame or powder, although 
a minor emission of flame from a striker or indicating device is 
permissible, provided this does not cause breakdown or 
significant electrical leakage to earth. 

b) After the fuse has operated, the components of the fuse, apart 
from those intended to be replaced after each operation, shall be 
in the original state. It shall be possible to remove the fuse-link 
in one piece after operation. 

However, it is permissible for the components designed to 
secure the fuse-element in renewable fuses to be slightly damaged, 
if such damage is not likely to prevent the replacement of the 
melted fuse-element, to decrease the breaking capacity of the fuse, 
to modify its operating characteristics, or to increase its tempera- 
ture rise in normal service. 

c) when fuse-links are provided with indicating devices or strikers: 

1) indicating devices need not comply with specific requirements, 
but shall visually and fully operate; and 

2) strikers shall comply fully with the requirements specified 
in 3.12. 

17 



IS:9385(PartI)-1979 

d; Operation shall not generate switching voltages higher than the 
values specified in 3.8. 

e) The values of cut-off current corresponding to each value of 
prospective breaking current shall not exceed the values correspon- 
ding to the cut-off characteristics given by the manufacturer. 

f ) After operation, the fuse shall be capable of withstanding the 
power-frequency recovery voltage across its terminals. 

4.2 Time/Current Characteristics — The time/current characteristics of 
fuse-links are based on applying current to a new and unloaded fuse-link 
in a fuse-base specified by the manufacturer and connected to the test- 
circuit with conductor sizes and lengths as specified in 6.4.1.2. 

Unless otherwise specified, the time/current characteristics shall be 
deemed to apply at an ambient air temperature of 27 # C. 

5. MARKING 

5.0 The markings which ■ shall be indelibly made on fuse-links and 
fuse-bases are given below. 

Note — When the physical dimensions of the fuse-link are so small as to make it 
impossible for such markings to include the indications given below, alternative methods 
may be adopted. 

The figures representing ratings shall in all cases be followed by the 
symbol of the unit in which they are expressed. 

5.1 On the Fuse-Base 

a) Manufacturer's name or trade-mark, 

b) Rated voltage, and 

c) Rated current. 

5.2 On the Fuse-Link 

a) Manufacturer's name or trade-mark, 

b) Manufacturer's type designation, 

c) Rated voltage, 

d) Rated current, 

e) Rated breaking current, 

f ) Rated minimum breaking current ( for back-up fuses only), and 

g) Direction of striker ( if fitted ). 

5.3 It shall also be indicated on both fuse-link and fuse-base, when 
applicable, if they are designed for outdoor service. 

18 



IS:9385(ParU)-1979 

5.4 Fuses may also be marked with the ISI Certification Mark. 

Note — The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the 
Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and Regulations 
made thereunder. The ISI Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys 
the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that 
standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is 
devised and supervised by ISI and operated by the producer. ISI marked products are 
also continuously checked by ISI for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. 
Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the ISI Certification Mark 
may be granted to manufacturers or processors, may be obtained from the Indian 
Standards Institution. 

6. TESTS 
6.0 General 

6.0.1 Type tests are made to check whether a type or particular design of 
fuse corresponds to the characteristics specified and functions satisfactorily 
under normal operating conditions or under special specified conditions. 
Type tests are made on samples to check the specified characteristics of all 
fuses of the same type. 

These tests shall be repeated only if the construction is changed in a 
way which might modify the performance. 

For convenience of testing, and with the previous consent of the 
manufacturer, the values prescribed for the tests, particularly the tolerances, 
can be so changed as to make the test conditions more severe. Where a 
tolerance is not specified, type tests shall be carried out at values not less 
severe than the specified values: the upper limits are subject to the consent 
of the manufacturer. 

6.0.2 Tests specified in this standard are in principle type tests, and 
methods of sampling for acceptance tests are not covered in this standard. 

If the user wishes to make acceptance tests, these tests shall be selected 
from the type tests after agreement between the manufacturer and the 
user. 

Where tests are made on a fuse whose report of type tests had already 
been accepted, the responsibility of the manufacturer to the user is limited 
to the least onerous of the specified values and not to the values obtained 
during the type tests. For example, although breaking tests may have been 
made at 103 percent of the specified power-frequency recovery voltage, 
nevertheless the manufacturer is not liable for any performance figures 
exceeding 100 percent of the specified power- frequency recovery voltage. 

6.0.3 Special tests meant for certain types of fuses or for fuses for special 
applications are given in 7. 

19 



IS:93S5(PartI)-1979 

6.1 List of Type Tests 

6.1.1 The type tests to be conducted upon completion of a design or 
following a change that affects the performance are as given below; 

a) Dielectric tests ( 6.3 ), 

b) Temperature-rise tests ( 6.4 ), 

c) Breaking tests ( 6.5 ), 

d) Tests for time/current characteristics ( 6*6 ), 

e) Oil-tightness tests ( only for fuses intended to be used in oil ) 
( 6.7 ), and 

f ) Test of strikers ( 6.8 ). 

6.1.1.1 The results of all type tests shall be recorded in type test 
reports containing the data necessary to prove compliance with this standard. 

6.2 Common Test Practices for All Type Tests 

6.2.1 The following shall be common test practices, unless otherwise 
specified: 

a) The device shall be new, clean and in good condition. 

b) The fuse to be tested shall be mounted on _a rigid earthed metal 
structure in the normal service position for which it is designed. 
The connections shall be so positioned that the normal clearances 
are not reduced. 

6.3 Dielectric Tests 
6.3.1 Test Practices 

6.3.1.1 Mounting — For multi-pole arrangements of fuses, and when 
the distance between poles is not fixed by their construction, it is necessary, 
for test purposes, to provide the minimum distance between poles as 
specified by the manufacturer. 

6.3.1.2 Electrical connections — Electrical connections shall be made 
by means of bare conductors connected to each terminal. These conduc- 
tors shall project from the terminals of the fuse in substantially a straight 
line parallel "to the fuse-link for an unsupported distance of at least the 
isolating distance of the fuse. 

6.3.2 Application of Test Voltage for Impulse and Power-Frequency 
Tests — The test voltage specified in Table 1 for fuse under test shall be 
applied successively with one terminal of the output of the impulse 
generator and one point of the power-frequency source connected to earth. 

20 



IS:9385(PartI)-1979 

a) Between the terminals and all earthable metal parts: 

1) with the fuse including the fuse-link and its fuse-carrier 
completely assembled ready for service, and 

2) with the fuse-4ink removed. 

Note — For multi-pole arrangements of fuses: 

a) between all live parts of all poles connected together and the 
earthable metal parts, and 

b) between the terminals of each pole and the earthable metal 
parts with all the live parts of the other poles connected to the 
earthable metal parts. 

b) Between terminals: these tests are made on fuse-bases only. 

The earthable metal parts shall be connected to earth if isolating . 
properties are not assigned to the fuses. If isolating properties are assigned 
to the fuse, earthable metal parts shall either be insulated from the earth 
or connected to the mid-point of the source. 

Note — For multi-pole arrangements of fuses, the terminals of one side shall be con- 
nected together and the terminals of the opposite side shall be connected together. 

6.3.3 Atmospheric Conditions During Test — The test shall be made at 
atmospheric conditions as near as possible to the standard conditions 
specified in IS : 2071 ( Part I)-1974*. 

The correction factors for density and for air humidity shall be as 
given in IS : 2071 (Part I )-1974 !l! unless otherwise mentioned. 

6.3.4 Test Voltages — The test voltages to be used for the tests shall be 
in accordance with those given in Table 1. 

6.3.5 Lightning Impulse Voltage Dry Tests — Fuses shall be subjected to 
lightning impulse voltage dry tests with 1*2/50 impulses in accordance with 
IS:2071(PartI)-1974*. 

Fifteen consecutive impulses at the rated lightning impulse withstand 
voltages specified in Table 1 shall be applied as follows: 

a) At the rated withstand voltage to earth and between poles for all 
the test conditions (a) of 6.3.3; 

b) At the rated withstand voltage to earth and between poles for the 
test condition (b) of 6.3.2, if isolating properties are not assigned to 
the fuse base; and 

c) At the rated withstand voltage across the isolating distance for the 
test condition (b) of 6.3.2, if isolating properties are assigned to the 
fuse-base. 



•Methods of high voltage testing: Part I General definitions and test requirements {first 
revision). 

21 



IS:9385(PartI)-1979 

The fuse shall be considered to have passed the test successfully if the 
number of disruptive discharges to earth, between poles or between termi- 
nals on self-restoring insulation, does not exceed two for each test 
condition and if no disruptive discharge on non-self-restoring insulation 
occurs. 

The fuse shall be capable of passing the specified tests with voltages 
of both positive and negative polarity, but where there is evidence as to 
which polarity will give the lower breakdown voltage, it shall suffice to test 
with that polarity only. 

6.3.6 Power-Frequency Voltage Dry Tests — Fuses shall be subjected to 
one-minute power-frequency voltage dry tests, as specified in IS : 2071 
(Partl)-1974*. 

The test circuit ( transformer with voltage-regulating device ) shall 
have a short-circuit current of at least 0*2 A. It is permissible to check the 
magnitude of the current at approximately one-tenth of the specified 
voltage. 

The values for the rated one-minute power-frequency withstand 
voltage tests are specified in Table 1. The tests shall be made at the 
following values. 

a) At the rated withstand voltage to earth and between poles for all 
the test conditions (a) of 6.3.2; 

b) At the rated withstand voltage to earth and between poles for the 
test condition (b) of 6.3.2, if isolating properties are not assigned to 
the fuse-base; and 

c) At the rated withstand voltage across the isolating distance for 
the test condition (b) of 6.3.2 "if isolating properties are assigned to 
the fuse-base. 

If flashover or puncture occurs, the fuse shall be considered to have 
failed the test. 

£.3.7 Power-Frequency Wei Tesis — Outdoor type fuses shall be subjected 
to power-frequency voltage wet tests under the same conditions as specified 
in 6.3.6 except for the duration, which is 1 minute. However, if a disrup- 
tive discharge on external self-restoring insulation occurs, this test shall be 
repeated with the same test conditions and the fuse shall be considered to 
have passed this test successfully if no further disruptive discharge occurs. 

During these tests, the fuses shall be subjected to artificial rain at an 
angle of 45° to the vertical, the test procedure being in accordance with IS : 
2071 (Partl)-1974*. 

♦Methods of high voltage testing: Part I General definitions and test requirements {first 
revision ) . 

22 



IS : 9385 (Part I)- 1979 

6.4 Temperature-Rise Tests 

6.4.1 Test Practices — Temperature-rise tests shall be on one fuse and as 
given below. 

6.4.1.1 Test sample — The fuse-base shall be as specified by the 
manufacturer of the fuse-link being tested. 

The fuse-link shall be of the highest current-rating for use in the 
iuse-base. 

6.4.1.2 Arrangement of the equipment — The test shall be made in a 
closed room substantially free from air currents, except those generated by 
heat from the device being tested. 

The fuse shall be mounted in the most unfavourable position within 
the directions specified by the manufacturer and connected to the test 
circuit by bare copper conductors as follows: each conductor shall be 
approximately 1 m long, mounted in a plane parallel to the mounting 
surface of the fuse, but they may be in any direction in this plane. The 
sizes of the leads are given in Table 6. 

Note — Depending on the value of the test currents, aluminium conductors of 
approximate sizes, in the place of bare copper conductors can also be used for the pur- 
poses of temperature-rise tests. For details of standard cross-sections of aluminium 
conductors see Tables 6 and 7 of IS : 9224 ( Part I )-1979*. 

TABLE 6 SIZES OF BARE COPPER CONDUCTORS FOR THE PURPOSES 
OF TEMPERATURE-RISE TESTS 

Current Rating of the Fuse Size of Bare Copper 

Conductors 

(1) (2) 

A mm* 

Up to and including T25 From 20 to 30 

Above 25 up to and including 63 From 40 to 60 

Above 63 up to and including 200 From ] 20 to 160 

Above 200 up to and including 400 From 250 to 350 

Above 400 up to and including 630 , From 400 to 600 

Note — The equivalent area in MGM ( one thousand circular mils ) can be 
obtained by multiplying the above numbers in col (2) by 2. 

Normal clearances need not be provided. 

Tests shall be made with the rated current of the fuse-link and at a 
frequency between 48 Hz and 52 Hz. Each test shall be made over a period 
of time sufficient for the temperature-rise to reach a constant value 

•Specification for low voltage fuses : Part I General requirements. 

23 



IS: 9385 (Part I) -1979 

( for practical purposes, this condition is regarded as being obtained when 
the variation does not exceed 1°C per hour ). 

The temperature-rise of the various parts of the fuse shall not exceed 
the specified values at an ambient air temperature not more than 40°C 
during the test. No correction shall be applied to any ambient air 
temperature within the range of 10 to 40°C. 

6.4.2 Measurement of Temperature — All reasonable precautions shall be 
taken to reduce the variations and the errors due to the time lag between 
the temperature of the fuse and the variations in the ambient air 
temperature. 

6.4.2.1 Temperature of fuse parts — The temperature of the various 
parts for which limits are specified shall be determined by devices such as 
thermocouples, thermometers or contact elements located and secured to 
provide good heat conduction at the hottest accessible spot. 

The bulbs of thermometers shall be suitably protected against cooling 
from the outside. The protected area shall be negligible compared with the 
cooling area of the part to which the thermometer is secured. 

6.4.2.2 Ambient air temperature — The ambient air temperature is the 
average temperature of the air surrounding the fuse or its elements. It 
shall be measured during the last quarter of the test period by means of 
thermocouples or thermometers at a distance of approximately 1 m from 
the fuse. It is permissible to use an additional fuse of the same construc- 
tion as the fuse under test or an oil cup or any other suitable means for 
the determination of ambient air temperature. 

6.5 Breaking Tests ( see Fig. 2 ) 

6.5.1 Test Practices 

6.5.1.1 Description of tests to be made — Tests shall be made according 
to the instructions given in Table 7 and shall include three test duties: 

Test duty 1: Verification of the rated breaking current I x ( see Notes 1, 
3, 4 and 5) 

Test duty 2: Verification of operation with prospective currents I 2 
near to those giving the maximum arc energy ( see Notes 
1 to 4) 

Test duty 3: Verification of operation with the current / 3 : for general 
purpose fuses, this is the current that causes melting in 
1 hour; for back-up fuses, it is the minimum breaking 
current ( see Note 1 ). 

It is not necessary to make breaking tests on fuse-links of all current 
ratings of a homogeneous series ( see 6.5.3 for the requirements to be met 
and tests to be made ). 

24 



IS : 9385 ( Part I ) - 1979 





v^. 



Fig. 2 Breaking Tests — Arrangement of the Equipment 

Also an homogeneous series can be approved without breaking tests 
by interpolation between the results of tests of related homogeneous series 
of fuses of higher and lower rated voltages; see 6.5.4 for the requirements 
to be met. 

Note 1 — Values of / ls /» and / 3 are the rms values of the ac component of the 
current. 

Note 2 — As a guide, the value of the current 7 a to comply with this requirement 
may be determined by one or other of the following methods: 

a) From the following equation, if one test at a current 150 times the current rating 
or higher has been made under symmetrical fault initiation in test duty 1: 



V 



-JW 



25 



IS:9385(PartI)-1979 

where 

I t *=* prospective current for test duty 2; 

i t «=? instantaneous current at instant of melting in test duty 1 ; 

I x = prospective current in test duty 1. 

b) By taking between three and four times the current which corresponds to a pre- 
arcing time of one half-cycle on :the time/current characteristic ( see 6.6 and 3.9 ). 
If a time/current characteristic curve exists for virtual times less than one-half- 
cycle, it is preferable to use the current corresponding on this time/current 
characteristic to a time of 0*08 normal half-cycles. 

Note 3 — If in making tests in accordance with test duty 2, the requirements of test 
duty 1 are completely met on one or more tests, then, these tests need not be repeated as 
part of test duty 1 . 

Note 4 — If the prospective current necessary to comply with the requirements of 
test duty 2 is greater than the rated breaking current, test duties 1 and 2 shall be replac- 
ed by six tests at rated breaking current with making angles as nearly as possible equally 
distributed with approximately 30° between each. (For parameters of test duty 2, see 
Table 7 except making angle and value of instantaneous current at initiation of arcing.) 

Note 5 — If it is impossible, even by making at the earliest permissible angle, to ini- 
tiate arcing as early as 65° after voltage zero, the requirement of one test with the initi- 
ation of arcing from 40 to 65° after voltage zero is replaced by an additional test 
( making a total of three ) with initiation of arcing from 65 to 90 9 after voltage zero. 

6.5.1.2 Characteristics of the test circuit — The breaking tests shall be 
made with single-phase alternating current and with single fuses. 

The circuit elements used to control the current and power factor 
shall be on series relationship with each other and with the fuse, as shown 
in Fig. 3 and 4. No reactors shall be used that are subject to saturation. 

The test circuit frequency shall be between 45 Hz and 52 Hz. 

It is recommended that there shall be no distortion of the power- 
frequency recovery voltage that can readily be seen by inspection of the 
oscillogram. Where some distortion is unavoidable, it shall not be such as 
to necessitate the open-circuit voltage to be more than 107 percent of the 
voltage corresponding to the required recovery voltage on test duties 1 and 
2, as specified in 6.5.1.1. 

A cathode-ray oscillograph shall be provided for switching-voltage 
measurement during test duties 1 and 2. A cathode-ray oscillograph, a 
sphere-gap or a device of equivalent response shall be provided for 
switching-voltage measurement during test duty 3. 

Switching-voltage protective equipment used in the test circuit shall 
be such that no sparkover occurs during the normal interrupting operation 
of the fuse, since a parallel path through protective equipment may reduce 
the duty on the fuse. 

26 



IS : 9385 (Part I) -1979 

The prospective transient recovery voltage wave of the test circuit 
shall comply with the following two requirements: 

Requirement a): Its envelope shall at no time be below the specified 
reference line. 

Note — It is stressed that the extent by which the envelope may exceed the 
specified reference line requires the consent of the manufacturer ( see 6.0.1, para 3 ) . 

Requirement b): Its initial portion shall not cross the specified delay 
line ( if any ). 

These requirements are illustrated in Fig. 9. 

Standard' values of reference and delay lines specified for the various 
test duties are as follows: 

a) Test duty 1 

In principle, the tests are to be made with the standardized values 
of TRV specified in 3.11.3. However, as stated in Appendix D 
current-limiting fuses are not sensitive to TRV characteristics, 
except when the highest arc voltage is reached immediately after 
initiation of the arc. Consequently, for convenience of testing, 
the tests may be made as follows: 

A first test will be made with any convenient prospective 
TRV and with initiation of arcing from 65 to 9G° after voltage 
zero. If during this test, the highest peak of arc voltage is not 
reached within a time equal to 2 t t after initiation of arcing, this 
test is valid and the test duty 1 will be completed in the same 
circuit. Otherwise, the circuit shall be changed to provide a TRV 
with an envelope being at no time below the reference line specified 
in 3.11.3 and an initial portion not crossing the specified delay line. 
All the tests of test duty 1 shall be made in this new circuit. 

b) Test duty 2 

Tests shall be made with the values of prospective TRV specified 
in Table 6A. 

The prospective TRV wave of the circuit shall comply with 
the following requirements: 

1) its highest peak shall be not smaller than the parameter u c 
specified; 

2) the rising segment of its envelope shall be between the two lines 
specified by the tolerance of t 3 . 

Note — A delay line is not specified, because the initial portion of the 
TRV wave is of no importance for the behaviour of the fuse ( see 
Appendix D. ) 

27 



IS : 9385 ( Part I ) - 1979 




Fig. 3 Breaking Tests — Typical Circuit Diagram for 
Test Duties 1 and 2 

c) Test duty 3 

TRV characteristics are not specified for this test duty; the reac- 
tance of the circuit [ which may be the reactance of the transformer 
or the reactance of the transformer and reactor(s)] shall be shunted 
by a resistance with a value equal to approximately 40 times the 
value of the reactance. However, if this value does not result in 
at least critical damping, the resistance shall be lower to achieve 
critical damping. 





TABLE 6A VALUES OF PROSPECTIVE TRV 






[ Clause 6.5 


1.2(b)] 




Rated 

Voltage 


Basic Parameters 

_, ,.,,_ ,,. ., A, 


Rate of Rise 


Peak Voltage 


Time Co-ordinate 


«c//3 


0) 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


kV 


kV 


(IS 


kV/(is 


3*6 


6-6 


120-160 


0-055-0-041 


7-2 


13'2 


156-208 


0-084-0063 


12 


22 


180-240 


0-122-0-091 


24 


44 


264-352 


0-167-0-125 


36 


66 


324-432 


0-203-0-152 


72*5 


133 


504-672 


0-265-0-199 


"o — 


1*5 x 1-5 X V2/3 Ut 







Critical damping is obtained when 

/o 



R=%fy-X 



28 



IS: 9385 (Part I)- 1979 

where 

/o = natural frequency of the circuit without additional damping, 

/n *= power frequency, and 

X = reactance of the circuit at power frequency. 

-=1 ° j E Z -^ 8 

E3 o, j 




0, 




O t -> current measurement 
O t ™ recovery voltage measurement 
Og = reference voltage measurement 
7"i — 7» — possible locations of the transformer 
£ = adjustable impedance 



A mm removable link used for the 

calibration test 
B — fuse under test 
D «- circuit-breaker protecting the 

source 
E — making switch 

Fig. 4 Breaking Tests — Typical Circuit Diagram for Test Duty 3 

6.5.1.3 Test samples — The fuse-link shall be tested in a fuse-base as 
specified by the manufacturer of the fuse-link. 

In making tests on renewable fuses, fuse-links or refill units of the 
same manufacturer as the fuse or as specified by the manufacturer of the 
fuse shall be used. 

6.5.1.4 Arrangement of the equipment — For test duties 1 and 2, the 
conductors shall be arranged as shown in Fig. 2, in order to reproduce the 
electromagnetic forces which may occur in service. To prevent any move- 
ment of the conductors from causing excessive mechanical stresses on the 
fuse-base, the conductors shali be secured at a distance equai to the insulator 
height if this height exceeds 0*50 m or at 0*50 m if the insulator height does 
not exceed 050 m. 

Note 1 — The fuse shall be tested in the vertical orientation unless it is known that 
the horizontal arrangement is more severe, in which case the fuse shall be tested horizon- 
tally. 

Note 2 — Oil-tight fuse-links shall be tested in an oil-filled enclosure designed to simu- 
late service conditions. 

6.5.2 Test Procedure 

6.5.2.1 Calibration of tke test circuit — The fuse or the fuse-link under 
test shall be replaced by a link of negligible impedance compared with that 
of the test circuit as shown in Fig. 3 and 4. 



29 



IS:9385(PartI)-1979 

The circuit shall be adjusted to give the specified prospective current. 
This shall be verified by an oscillographic record. 

Note — For direct tests of test duty 3 the calibration of the test circuit may not be 
necessary, but when made, current may be measured by an ammeter as an alternative 
to an oscillographic record. 

6.5.2.2 Test method — The link A is removed and is replaced by the 
fuse or the fuse-link B under test. 

The making switch E is closed at such an instant as to provide the 
conditions specified in Table 7. 

For test duties 1, 2 and 3, switching voltages shall be measured. For 
test duties 1 and 2, cut-off currents shall be determined. 

In test duty 3, current may be measured by an ammeter as an alterna- 
tive or an addition to an oscillographic record. 

After the fuse has operated, recovery voltage shall be maintained 
across the fuse for the periods specified in Table 7. The first few cycles 
shall be recorded by an oscillograph and the remainder may be observed on 
a voltmeter. 

Note — • During this period, the power frequency may be lower than the specified 
minimum value. 

Alternative test method for test duty 3 — To avoid testing at the specified 
voltage for the full test period, an alternative test may be made as follows: 

The fuse to be tested is connected in a low-voltage test circuit for the 
major portion of the test period and then switched to a high-voltage test 
circuit for the conclusion of the test. 

The test circuits shall be as follows: 

a) Any low voltage 50 Hz power source sufficient to cause the desired 
current to flow through the fuse to be tested and means for 
adjusting the circuit to hold the current constant. 

b) A high voltage 50 Hz test circuit as indicated in 6:5.1.2. This 
circuit shall be preadjusted to provide the same current as for the 
low voltage portion of the test, as well as the parameters as 
specified in Table 7. 

c) Provision for switching from the low voltage source to the high 
voltage source such that the current is interrupted for a time 
interval not longer than 0*2 second; however, the time interval 
between the reapplication of current and the beginning of arcing 
shall be long enough to make it possible to have no asymmetry, 
to evaluate the current and to see from the-oscillogram that there 
is no appreciable decrement of the value of current. 

30 



IS: 9385 (Part I) -1979 



TABLE 7 PARAMETERS FOR BREAKING TESTS 

( Clauses 6.5.1.1 and 6.5.2.2) 

Parameters Test Duties 



Power-frequency recovery 
voltage 



Prospective TRV charac- 
teristics 



1 

( 0*87 X rated vol- 
tage) 



q percent 



-see 6.5. 1.2- 



Power factor 



Prospective current [ rms 
value of the ac compbnent ) 

Instantaneous current at 
initiation of arcing 

Making angle 



Initiation of arcing after 
voltage zero 



Maintained voltage after 
breaking ( see Notes 4 and 
5) 

Number of tests 



-From 0-07 to0'15- 
see Note 1 



Rated voltage 

+5 
q percent 

Not specified 
0-4 to 0-6 

* 3 I3 ,q percent 

see Note 2 

From 0"85 l a to Not applicable 
106 I 2 

Not before voltage From to 20° Random timing 
zero after voltage zero 

For one test: 
From 40 to 65° 
For two tests: 
From 65 to 90° 
see Note 3 

Not less than 15 
seconds 



4.5 
h n percent 



Not applicable 



Not applicable Not applicable 



Not less than 60 seconds 



Note 1 — ■ When the manufacturer agrees, the lower limit does not apply. 

Note 2 — When testing station limitations prevent the maintenance of constant cur- 
rent, the tolerance on the current can be exceeded in either direction during not more 
than 20 percent of the total melting time, provided that the current at the initiation 
of arcing is within the tolerance specified for test duty 3. 

Note 3 — - Since the operating conditions can produce a wide variety of stresses on the 
fuse and as the breaking tests are intended in principle to produce the most severe condi- 
tions mainly as regards the arc energy and the thermal and mechanical stresses for this 
value of current, it is recognized that these conditions will be practically obtained at 
least once, when making tiie three tests indicated. 

Note 4 — For fuses which are subject in service to the recovery voltage for a time 
less than 1 second, the maintained voltage period after operation will be 1 second. 

Note 5 — The initial value of the power-frequency recovery voltage shall be equal 
to the specified value, but when testing limitations prevent the maintenance of constant 
voltage, the maintained voltage may drop to 15 percent below the specified value. 



31 



IS :9385 (Parti)- 1979 

6.5.2.3 Interpretation of oscillograms — For test duties 1 and 2, the 
prospective breaking current shall be the rms value of the ac component of 
the current, measured one half-cycle after the initiation of short circuit in 
the calibration test ( see Fig. 5 and 6 ). 

For test duty 3, the breaking current shall be the rms symmetrical 
current measured at the instant of the initiation of the arc in the breaking 
test ( see Fig. 7 ) or the value indicated by the ammeter. 

The value of the power frequency recovery voltage is measured between 
the peak of the second non-influenced half-wave and the straight line drawn 
between the peaks of the preceding and following half-waves \ see Fig. 5, 6 
and 7). 

6.5.2.4 Parameters to be used for tests — The parameters to be used 
when making the tests are given in Table 7. 

If a tesi is made under more severe conditions than specified and if 
this test is successful, this test shall be valid. 

6.5.3 Breaking Tests for fuse-Links of a Homogeneous Series 

6.5.3.1 Characteristics of fuse-links of a homogeneous series — Fuse- 
links are considered as forming a homogeneous series when their characteris- 
tics comply with the following: 

a) Rated voltage, breaking current and frequency shall be the same. 

b) Ail materials shali be the same. 

c) AU dimensions of the fuse-link except the cross-section and the 
number of fuse-element(s) as detailed below from item (d) to (h) 
shall be the same. 

d) In any fuse-link, all the main fuse-elements shall be indentical. 

e) The law governing the variation of the cross section of individual 
fuse-elements along their length shall be the same. 

f ) All variations in thickness, width and number shall be monotonous* 
with respect to rated current. Thus, balancing an increase in 
cross section by reducing the number of fuse-elements and vice 
versa is not allowed. 

g) The variation in distance, if any, between individual fuse-elements 
and that in distance, if any, between fuse-element(s) and fuse- 
barrel shall be monotonous* with respect to the rated current. 

h) A special fuse-element used for an indicator or striker is exempt 
from (e) and (f) above, but this element shall be the same for all 
the fuse-links. 



♦Monotonous function: a function continually varying in the same direction for a given 
direction of the variable. 

32 



IS : 9385 ( Part I ) - 1979 



CURRENT < 



RECOVERY VOLTAGEI 



REFERENCE VOLTAGE 




CURRENT [ 



RECOVERY VOLTAGE 



0, 
CALIBRATION 



REFERENCE VOLTAGE 



rms value of the ac component of prospective breaking current l x = — -_^= 



Recovery voltage Fj 



'2i/2 



Fig. 5 Breaking Test — Interpretation of Oscillograms 
for Test Duty 1 



33 



iS:9385(PartI)-1979 



A 



CURRENT I 2 



RECOVERY VOLTAGE \ £ 




■Ot 

2 



/www 



03 



REFERENCE VOLTAGE 



An 



rms value of the ac component of prospective breaking current /, «= 7=~ 

At is measured from the calibration test as A\ 
Recovery voltage F a =* j— 

Fig. 6 Breaking Tests — Interpretation of Oscillograms 
for Test Duty 2 



CURRENT h 




RECOVERY VOLTAGE 



REFERENCE VOLTAGE 



rms value of the ac component of breaking current / 3 ■= 
Recovery voltage V% i 



A a 



2V2 



2\/2 



Fig. 7 Breaking Tests — Interpretation of Oscillograms 

for Test Duty 3 

34 



IS : 9385 ( Part I ) - 1979 



8 

< 




u f 



TIME 



Fig. 8 



Representation of Specified TRV by a 2-Parameter 
Reference Line and a Delay Line 




ENVELOPE OF PROSPECTIVE TEST TRV 




[REFERENCE 
LINE OF 
SPECFISP TRV 



PROSPECTIVE TEST TRV 



OELAY ' LINE OF SPECIFIED TRV 

I 
l 



t„ 



t' 



*I«5I 



Fig. 9 Example of Prospective Test TRV with Two-Parameter 

Envelope Which Satisfies the Condition to be Met 

During Type Test 



35 



IS :9385(PartI)-1979 

6.5.3.2 Test requirements — In a homogeneous series of fuse-links, 
breaking tests need only be made in accordance* with Table 8. 

Symbols in Table 8 are used with the following meanings: 

A — fuse-link of lowest current rating, 

B = any fuse-link of a current rating between A and C, and 

C = fuse-link of highest current rating. 

The parameters to be considered are: 

5 A , S Bi S Ct cross-section of the individual main fuse-elements A, B,C. 

"a, "b, n c, number of main fuse-elements in A, B t C. 

6.5.3.3 Interpretation of breaking tests — If the results of tests made 
according to Table 8 meet the requirements of 4.1.3, any current rating of 
fuse-links within the homogeneous series shall be deemed to comply with 
the breaking requirements of this specification. 

If a fuse-link does not perform satisfactorily according to 4.1.3 on one 
or more test series, that fuse-link shall be rejected from the homogeneous 
series, but such failure does not necessarily entail rejection of any other 
current rating. 

It should be noted that a particular range of current ratings in one 
barrel size may constitute one homogeneous series for one test duty, but two 
or more homogeneous series for the purpose of another test duty. 

The values of minimum breaking current of fuse-links not tested are 
determined from test duty 3 as follows: 

a) Constant n, increase of S: 

It is assumed that the pre-arcing time at / 8 for fuse-links A 
and B is not less than for the fuse-link C. The test in accordance 
with Table 8 is therefore considered as providing that fuse-links 
A and B have a minimum breaking current ascertained by 
reading from their time/current characteristics the currents 
corresponding to the pre-arcing time .given by the minimum 
breaking current of fuse-link C and its time/current characteristic 
( see Fig. 10 ). 

b) Constant S, increase ofn: 

The minimum breaking current I s of fuse-links A and C may 
or may not be the same. If they are the same, I z is deemed to 
apply to fuse link B. If they are different, a straight line is drawn 
through the points corresponding to the respective minimum 
breaking currents on the time/current characteristics of fuse-links 
A and C. The intersection of this line and the time/current 
characteristic of fuse-link B is deemed to define the minimum 
breaking current of fuse-link B ( see Fig. 11). 

36 



IS:9385(PartI)-1979 



TABLE 8 BREAKING TESTS FOR HOMOGENEOUS SERIES 

{Clause 6.5.3.2) 



Homogeneous Series 
Achieved by 


Test 
duties 


Fuse-Links to be Tested 
(Crosses Show the Tests to be 
Performed ) 




A 


B 


C 


Progressive change in number n and/ 
or cross section S monotonous 


1 


X 




X 


with respect to rated current 
nA < »B < «C 


2 
see Note 1 


X 




X 


Sa<Sb<Sc 


3 
see Note 2 


X 


X 

see Note 3 


X 


Constant number n 
Increase of cross section £ 


1 


X 




X 


Sa<Sb< Sc 


2 

see Note 1"| 


X 




X 




3 






X 


Constant cross section S 
Increase of number n 


1 


X 




X 


RA < «B < «G 


2 






X 




3 
set Note 2 


X 




X 



Note I — The test currents 1% for the fuse-links A and C wiii have been chosen ac- 
cording to the current rating of the fuse-links A and C respectively. 

Note 2 •—■ The fuse-link of lowest current rating shall contain at least 2 individual 
main fuse-eiements in addition to the element, if any, used for operating the striker. 

Note 3 — This does not require that every rating must be tested, but with diminishing 
current ratings a test is only to be made for the current rating at which the number of 
elements is reduced. 



37 



IS:3385(PaitI)*1979 

i 
TIME 




Fig. 



CURRENT 



Determination of the Minimum Breaking Current 
( Constant n t Increase of S ) 



TIME 




MABC) . If 

I 3 A I 3 C 



CURRENT 



Fig. 1 1 Determination of the Minimum Breaking Current 
( Constant S t Increase of n ) 



38 



IS: 9385 (Pari I) -1979 

If the manufacturer claims a value of minimum breaking current less 
than that derived from (a) and (b) above, this shall be proved by a separate 
test. 

6.5.4 Acceptance of a Homogeneous Series of Fuse-Links by Interpolation — 
If two homogeneous series X and Z of different voltage ratings Ux and 
U z have been tested successfully, a third homogeneous series Y of an 
intermediate voltage rating U Y need not, in principle, be tested provided 
that: 

a) The rated voltage U z is not greater than 2 Ux, 

b) The current ratings of Y are not outside the range of current 
ratings common to series X and Z already tested. 

c) The rated breaking currents at rated voltages Ux and Uz are the 
same, or, if they are different, only the lower value is assumed to 
be applicable to U Y . 

d) The rated minimum breaking currents of fuse-links of the same 
current ratings at rated voltages Ux and Uz are the same, or, if 
they are different, only the higher value is assumed to be applica- 
ble to U Y . 

e) The rated frequencies are the same. 

f ) All materials are the same. 

g) All dimensions except the length of the fuse-links and of the fuse- 
elements are the same. 

h) For each current rating, the number of individual fuse-elements and 
their cross section are the same; also the law governing the varia- 
tion of the cross section expressed as the number of variations per 
unit length must be kept constant when interpolating the length of 
the fuse-elements of intermediate voltage ratings, 
j) The length of the fuse-elements is linearly interpolated with respect 
to the voltage ratings already tested. 

6,5,5 Extension of the Principle of Homogeneous Series to Fuse-Links of 
Different Lengths 

6.5.5.1 General — When different barrel lengths dependent on the 
current ratings are used in a range of fuse-links, the fuse-links as a whole 
do not form a homogeneous series according to the criteria defined 
in 6.5.3.1. 

In fact, though the whole range comprises several homogeneous series 
each of them complying with the requirements of 6.5.3.1, the fuse-links as 
a whole do not meet the criteria (c) and (f) of 6.5.4 because: 

a) the fuse-elements have the same length but the barrels do not, 

b) the minimum current rating in one barrel length may be lower 
than the maximum current rating in a shorter barrel. 

39 



IS:9385(PartI)-1979 

However, performance and behaviour of such fuse-links are sufficiently 
close to make testing of all current ratings unnecessary. 

The following sub-clauses define the requirements to be met by the 
fuse-links and the tests to be made. 

6.5.5.2 Special requirements — In addition to the requirements specified 
in 6.5.3.1 and modified in 6.5.5.1, the fuse-links shall comply with the 
following: 

a) The fuse series does not contain any deliberately added gas-evolving 
material other than an explosive charge used to operate a striker 
or indicator; 

b) No pressure relief exists, excluding any resulting from the operation 
of a striker or indicator; and 

c) The nominal diameter of the barrel remains constant within usual 
manufacturing tolerances and the length of the barrel does not 
exceed 16 times the length of the shortest. 

6.5.5.3 Tests to be made — The first homogeneous series corresponding 
to both the lowest current ratings and the shortest length of barrel is 
represented by the suffix 1 and any other homogeneous series by the 
suffix X. 

L lt L x — length of the barrel 

A l9 A x = fuse- link of lowest current rating 

C lt C x = fuse-link of highest current Tating 

The tests shall be made as follows: 

a) The first individual homogeneous series 1 is to be tested in 
accordance with 6.5.3.2. 

b) For any other individual homogeneous series x: 

1) the fuse-link C x of highest current rating is to be tested to test 
duties 1, 2 and 3; 

2) test duties 1 and 2 of fuse-link A x are not required provided 
that in the smallest barrel size 1, the fuse tested has the same 
number of elements, or less, of the same or smaller cross 
section than fuse A x . 

Breaking tests of fuse-link A x to test duty 3 are not required provided 
that: 

"a x > "a, andS Ax < Sci 

where n Ax is the number of fuse-elements in A x and Sa x is the cross 
section of the individual fuse-elements A Xm 

40 



IS:9385(Part*)-1979 

The minimum breaking current of fuse-link A x is deemed to be the 
same as that of fuse-link C x ; if the manufacturer claims a lower value, this 
must be proved by a separate test. 

Note — This corresponds to the third case ( constant S, increase of n ) referred to in 
Table 9 because if A x is in accordance with the second case ( constant n, increase of S ), 
it is already exempted from test duty 3. 

6.6 Tests for Time/Current Characteristics 

6.6.1 Test Practices 

6.6X1 Ambient air temperature — The time/current characteristics 
shall be verified at any ambient air temperature between 22°C and 32°C- 

At the beginning of each test, the fuse shall be approximately at 
ambient air temperature. 

6.6.1.2 Arrangement of the equipment — The tests shall be made with 
the same arrangement of the equipment as for the temperature-rise tests if 
they are made separately (see 6.4.1.2) or for the breaking tests 
(see 6.5.1.4). 

In particular: 

a) the fuse-base shall be as specified by the manufacturer for the 
fuse-link being tested. 

b) the size and the length of conductors connected to the terminals 
shall be as specified in 6.4.1.2. 

c) oil-tight fuse-links shall be tested in an oil-filled enclosure designed 
to simulate service conditions. 

6.6.2 Test Procedures — Time/current tests shall be conducted as follows. 

6.6.2.1 Pre-arcing time I current tests — Pre-arcing time/current tests 
may be made at any convenient voltage with the test circuit so arranged 
that the current through the fuse is held to an essentially constant value. 

Time/current data obtained from breaking tests may be used. 

6.6.2.2 Time range — Tests shall be made in the following time ranges: 

a) Back-up fuses: from 0-01 second to 600 seconds 

b) General purpose fuses: from 0*01 second to 1 hour 

6.6.2.3 Measurement of current — The current through the fuse during 
time/current tests shall be measured by ammeter, oscillograph or other 
suitable instrument. 

6.6.2.4 Determination of time — When times are recorded by 
oscillograph, the pre-arcing times shall be the virtual or actual times, with 
indication of the selected method. 

41 



IS: 9385 (Parti) -1979 

6.7 OH-Tightness Tests — Fuse-links of current-limiting fuses designed to 
be used immersed in oil shall be tested as follows. 

Note — If several current ratings differing only in their fuse-elements are involved, 
testing the fuse-link of highest power dissipation is sufficient. 

The fuse-link shall be immersed in insulating oil under a pressure of 
7 x 10 4 N/m a . The rated current of the fuse-link shall be passed through it 
for 2 hour and the temperature of the oil shall be raised ( using supplemen- 
tary heating if necessary ) to between 75°C and 85°C and maintained 
within this range for the 2-hour test period. 

The current shall be switched off, the supplementary heating disconti- 
nued and the? oil cooled, or allowed to cool, to a temperature of 22 to 
32°C over any convenient period of time. 

This cycle shall be carried out six times and the fuse-link shall then 
be removed from the oil, cleaned externally and opened for inspection of 
the arc quenching medium, which shall show no sign of ingress of oil. 

6.8 Test of Strikers — The characteristics of strikers may be verified by the 
force/travel characteristic of the driving spring or by means of a pendulum. 

Machines for testing strikers of medium and heavy type shall be of 
the 4 N.m type; machines for testing strikers of light type shall be of the 
0*5 N.m type. 

Note — The use of a pendulum as described in ISO Recommendation ISO/R 442- 
1965* is recommended but with a smaller impact energy values and impact velocities 
as specified in ISO/R 179-i96Iy. For further details reference shall be made to these 
recommendations. 

The hammer of the testing machine shall be provided with a plane 
steel surface of minimum Vickers hardness 235 HV and of sufficient size 
normal to the direction of the striker travel, the striker after its specified 
free travel hitting the quiescently hanging hammer at this plane surface. 
The striker travel shall be directed to the centre of percussion of the 
mechiiie and shall be normal to a plane defined by this centre of percussion 
and by the axis of oscillation of the pendulum. 

An alternative method of test of strikers as given in Appendix E is 
also applicable. 

7. SPECIAL TESTS 

7.0 Conditions for Making the Tests — Special tests are made to check 
whether a type or particular design of fuse corresponds to the characteristics 
specified and behaves satisfactorily under special specified conditions. They 
are made on samples to check the specified characteristics of all fuses of the 
same type. 

♦Verification of pendulum impact testing machines for testing steels. 
f Plastics — Determination of the charpy impact resistance of rigid plastics ( Charpy 
impact flexural test). 

42 



IS : 9385 ( Part I ) - 1979 

These tests shall be repeated only if the construction is changed in a 
way which might modify the behaviour. 

For convenience of testing, and with the previous consent of the 
manufacturer, the values prescribed for the tests, particulary the tolerances, 
can be so changed as to make the test conditions more severe. 

Unless otherwise specified, the tests shall be made according to the 
test practices specified in 6.2 and as follows. 

7.1 List of Special Tests — The following tests are to be made after 
agreement between the manufacturer and the user for certain types of fuses 
or for special applications: 

a) Thermal shock tests ( for fuses intended to be used outdoors ); 

b) Power dissipation tests ( for fuses intended to be used under con- 
ditions of restricted cooling differing from those of temperature- 
rise tests ); and 

c) Radio influence tests ( under consideration ). 

The results of all tests shall be recorded in test reports containing the 
data necessary to prove compliance with this standard. 

7.1.1 Thermal Shock Tests 

7.1.1.1 Test sample — The fuse-base shall be as specified by the 
manufacturer of the fuse-link being tested. 

Note — If several current ratings differing only in their fuse-elements are involved, 
testing the fuse-link of highest power dissipation is sufficient. 

7.1.1.2 Arrangement of the equipment — The fuse shall be mounted 
within the directions specified by the manufacturer and connected to the 
test circuit by bare copper conductors having sizes as specified in 6.4.1.2. 

7.1.1.3 Test method — The fuse is subjected to 1 hour to a value of 
current chosen by agreement between manufacturer and user and not 
exceeding the rated current. Then, the fuse is sprayed with artificial rain at 
an angle approximately 45° to the vertical, at not higher than room 
temperature with a rate of precipitation of approximately 3 mm' per minute. 
This spraying shall be maintained for 1 minute with the test current still 
flowing. 

The fuse shall not exhibit any visible external sign of damage. 

Note — Owing to the wide variety of designs, it is not possible to state a general rule 
to. verify the effect of ingress of water. If a test of waterproofness is requested by the user^ 
such attest shall be defined and made by agreement between the manufacturer and the 
user. 

7.1.2 Power-Dissipation Tests — Fuses used under conditions of restricted 
cooling may require derating. To facilitate this derating, special tests to 
determine the power dissipation may be made. 

43 



IS:9385(PartI)-1979 

These tests are to be made under the conditions specified in 6.4. 

The power dissipation is determined when it has reached a steady 
value for the current value considered. The test shall be made at 50 
percent and 100 percent of the rated current. The power dissipation is 
expressed in watts. 

APPENDIX A 

( Clause 0.6 ) 

COMPARISON WITH THE CORRESPONDING IEC PUBLICATION 

A-0. This standard ( Part I ) makes the following major deviations from the 
IEC Publication referred to in 0.5. [The clause numbers given refer to 
those in this standard ( Part I ).] 

Clause 3.1.1 — For the purposes of this standard, only those rated 
voltages applicable to Indian system conditions are recognized. These 
values are those chosen from those indicated as Series I in IEC Publica- 
tion. This standard also includes 145 kV current limiting fuses. 

Clause 3.2.1 — This standard also covers fuse-bases of rated current 
of 630 A, to cater to indigenous manufacturing range. 

Clause 3.4 — Fuses covered by this specification are intended for 
rated frequency of 50 Hz. For guidance on fuses rated for 60 Hz, 
reference should be made to the IEC Publication referred to in 0.5. 

Table 3 Switching Voltages — The switching voltage values are under 
review with particular reference to Indian conditions. Till such time, 
the data are evolved, values for switching voltages recommended ±>y IEC 
( Table 3 ) are recommended. 

Clause 3.12, Table 5 Characteristics of Strikers — The current prac- 
tices in the country takes into account three types of strikers, light, 
medium and heavy as shown in Table 5. 

These corresponds to the types recommended by IEC. It is 
recognized at the international level, that in future two types of strikers 
could statisfy all requirements. 

Clause 5.2(g) — Item ( g ) 'direction of striker ( if fitted )' has been 
added to meet the requirement of the user. 

Clause 6.4.1.2, Table 6 — Appropriate size of bare copper conductors 
suitable for the purposes of temperature-rise test on fuses of 630 A are 
included. In addition, use of aluminium conductors is recommended 
with guidance on the appropriate sizes for the same. 

44 



IS : 9385 (Part I) -1979 

Clauses 6.6.1.1 and 6.7 — The permissible tolerance on reference 
temperature ( 27°C ) for conducting time/current characteristics test and 
oil-tightness test has been indicated as ±5°C (that is a range 22 to 
32°C ) to suit Indian conditions. 

Clause 6.8 — An alternate method of test of strikers is included in 
order to cater to the need of recommending electrical parameters for 
test circuits to enable unnecessary high power tests to be avoided. 

Clause B-l.l — The reference temperatures correspond to the condi- 
tions' prevalent in the country. 

APPENDIX B 

{Clause 1.4) 

NORMAL SERVICE CONDITIONS 
B-l. SERVICE CONDITIONS 

B-1.0 General — This standard applies to current-limiting fuses under the 
following conditions. If the fuses are to be used under conditions different 
from those mentioned in B-l.l to B-L5, the manufacturer should be 
consulted. 

B-1.1 The reference temperatures assumed for purpose of the specification 
are: 

a) Maximum ambient air temperature 45°C 

b) Maximum daily average ambient air temperature 35°C 

c) Maximum yearly average ambient air temperature 30°C 

d) Maximum temperature due to sunlight ( equivalent 80° C 
to black body temperature ) 

Note — This does not apply to specified, time/current characteristics of fuses 
which will be modified appreciably at the minimum temperatures. 

R-1.2 Altitude not Exceeding 1 000 Metres 

Note 1 — The rated voltages and insulation levels specified in this standard apply to 
high voltage fuses intended for use at altitudes not exceeding 1 000 m and for tempera- 
ture conditions specified above. In selecting a fuse for use at altitudes exceeding 
1 000 m, one or other of the following procedufes should be adopted; 

a) The test voltages for insulating parts in air should be determined by multiplying 
the value of the standard test voltages by the appropriate correction factor in 
col 2 of Table 9. 

b) In some cases, it may be more economical to select a higher rated voltage such 
that when it is multiplied by the appropriate correction factor as given in 
col 3 of Table 9, the resulting voltage is not lower than the highest service 
voltage of the system. 

45 



IS : 9385 ( Part I ) - 1979 

Note 2 — The rated current or the temperature-rise specified in the standard can be 
corrected for altitudes exceeding 1 000 m by using appropriate factors given in Table 10, 
col 2 and 3 respectively. Use shall be made of one correction factor from col 2 or col 3 
but not both, for any one application. 

TABLE 9 CORRECTION FACTOR FOR RATED VOLTAGE AND TEST 
VOLTAGE FOR ALTITUDES 

(Clause B-1.2) 

Maximum Altitude Correction Factor for Correction Factor for 

Test Voltage Referred Rated Voltage 

to Sea Level 

(1) (2) (3) 

m 

1 000 1-0 1*0 

1 500 1-05 0-95 

3 000 1-25 0-80 



TABLE 10 CORRECTION FACTOR FOR RATED CURRENT AND 
TEMPERATURE-RISE FOR ALTITUDE 

( Clause B-1.2) 

Maximum Altitudb Correction Factor for Correction Factor for 

Rated Current Temperature-Rise 

(1) (2) (3) 

m 

1 000 1-0 1-0 

1 500 0-99 0-98 

3 000 0-96 0-92 

For altitudes between 1 000 m and 1 500 m and between 1 500 m and 
3 000 m, the correction factors can be obtained by linear interpolation 
between the values given above, both for the purposes of Tables 9 and 10. 

B-1.3 The ambient air is not excessively ( or abnormally ) polluted by dust, 
smoke, corrosive or inflammable gases and vapour or salt. 

B-1.4 For indoor installations, only the normal condensation is present. 

B-1.5 For outdoor installations, the wind pressure does not exceed 
700 N/m 2 , 

46 



IS: 9385 (Part I) -1979 

APPENDIX C 

{Clause 3.11.1) 

METHOD OF DRAWING THE ENVELOPE OF THE PROSPECTIVE 

TRANSIENT RECOVERY VOLTAGE OF A CIRCUIT AND 

DETERMINING THE REPRESENTATIVE PARAMETERS 

C-l. INTRODUCTION 

C-l.l The transient recovery voltage wave may assume several different 
forms, both oscillatory and non-oscillatory. 

When the wave approaches that of a damped oscillation at one single 
frequency, the envelope is made up of two consecutive linear segments. The 
envelope shall reflect as closely as possible the actual shape of the transient 
recovery voltage. The method described here enables this air to be 
achieved in the majority of practical cases with sufficient approximation. 

Note — Nevertheless, some cases may arise where the proposed construction would 
lead to parameters quite obviously more severe than would be justified by the transient 
recovery voltage curve. Such cases should be dealt with as exceptions and should there- 
fore form the subject of an agreement between the manufacturer and the user or the 
test laboratory. 

C-2. DRAWING THE ENVELOPE 

C-2.1 The following method is used for constructing the line segments 
forming the envelope of the prospective transient recovery voltage curve: 

a) The first line segment passes through the origin 0, is tangential to 
the curve, and does not intersect the curve. 

In the case of curves whose initial portion is concave towards 
the left, the point of contact is often in the vicinity of the first 
peak ( see Fig. 12, segment OA ). 

If the concavity is towards the right, as in the case of an 
exponential, the point of contact is at the origin ( see Fig, 13, 
segment OA). 

b) The second line segment is a horizontal line tangential to the curve 
at its highest peak ( see Fig. 12 and 13, segment AC ). 

The two-parameter envelope O, A, C, is then obtained. 

C-3. DETERMINATION OF PARAMETERS 

C-3.1 The representative parameters are, by definition, the co-ordinates of 
the point of intersection of the line segments constituting the envelope. 

The two parameters u e and f s , shown in Fig. 12 and 13, can be 
obtained as co-ordinates of the point of intersection A. 

47 



IS:9385(PartI)-1979 




Fig. 12 Representation by Two Parameters of an Inherent 
Transient Recovery Voltage of a Circuit 



VOLTAGE ?—-_,- 



Uc 

r a 


c 


L 1 ■» 



t 3 TIME 

Fig. 13 Example of a Two-Parameter Reference Line for a 
TRV Whose Initial Portion is Concave Towards the Left 



48 



IS: 9385 (Part I) -1979 

APPENDIX D 

(Clause 6.5.1.2) 

REASONS WHICH LED TO THE CHOICE OF TRV VALUES 
FOR TEST DUTIES 1, 2 AND 3 

D-l. A high-voltage fuse shall operate satisfactorily under all normal 
service conditions and break the circuit without causing too high a switch- 
ing voltage. The breaking tests specified in this standard should therefore 
represent, as far as possible, the most onerous conditions normally met in 
service. Because fuses are used in the same networks as circuit-breakers, it 
might seem logical to use the same prospective TRV values as have been 
specified in standards for high voltage circuit-breakers. However, careful 
study has shown that these values would not be suitable for tests on fuses 
due to the different principles involved in circuit interruption by circuit- 
breakers or by fuses. 

D-2. Like a circuit-breaker, a fuse may cause transients in the recovery 
voltage after current zero, but it also produces a high arc voltage which 
may be dependent on the characteristics of the circuit as determined by 
the TRV conditions. It is therefore necessary to consider two fundamen- 
tally different effects of these test circuit parameters; the effect on the arc 
voltage and the effect on the transient recovery voltage. 

Fuse failures could be caused either by an excessive peak voltage 
during arcing or by voltage after arc extinction which is itself excessive or 
produces repetitive restriking. The tests should therefore prove that neither 
of these types of failure occurs. 

D-3. It has been found necessary to test fuses at three different prospective 
breaking currents h, l % and 7, corresponding to test duties 1, 2 and 3 in 
Table 7. Since tests at I z usually cover the performance at small overload 
currents, it is only necessary to cover the full range of prospective short- 
circuit currents in tests at /j and 7 a which sometimes differ very widely from 
each other. In general, T z varies between 02 percent and 100 percent of h, 
depending on the current rating, the rated breaking current and the design 
of a particular fuse. The wide range of prospective breaking currents, each 
associated with an infinite variety of TRV conditions, can only be covered 
by the two test currents by taking account of the empirical knowledge of 
the behaviour of current-limiting fuses. Based on present knowledge of 
fuse techniques and on experimental evidence, the following facts were taken 
into consideration. 

D-4. During its arcing time, a fuse is absorbing such an amount of energy 
that transient voltage oscillations, due to the inductance and capacitance of 
the circuit, are generally completely damped out. The only exception may 

49 



IS:9385(PartI)-1979 

occur during the first few microseconds after melting, while the arc is being 
established. During this period, the arc is still in relatively cool surround- 
ings and the damping effect by energy absorption can be small, resulting in 
high peak transient voltages if the arc voltage rises very steeply to a higher 
voltage than the crest of the source voltage. 

However, in the majority of the fuse designs marketed today, the arc 
voltage does not rise in this way and excessive arc voltages are not 
usually produced. 

D-5. Further, transients will only be generated in the recovery voltage if, 
immediately before or after current zero, there is a step change from arc 
voltage to the circuit emf or by chopping of the current. Because of the 
residual conductivity of the hot arcing products in a blown fuse-link, severe 
chopping does not take place and the voltage step is the only condition 
which has to be considered. 

D-6. Because the fuse absorbs a large amount of energy during the arcing 
period, the power factor can be considered as shifting from its original value 
towards unity. The actual current zero is thus nearer the voltage zero than 
it would be in the same circuit without any arc voltage. With the very high 
currents, defined by I l3 there is practically no voltage step at current zero 
and consequently recovery voltage transients are not produced. 

However, with test duty 2, the shift of power factor is less pronounced 
and the value of the circuit emf at current zero is sufficient to produce a 
voltage step and considerable transients. This difference in behaviour of fuses 
at currents of I t or J 2 is due to the different amounts of energy stored in the 
magnetic fields of the circuit inductance at the maximum cut-off current. 
The value of l 2 is deliberately chosen to produce conditions giving the 
maximum value of stored energy, and hence minimum power-factor shift, 
so that the maximum voltage step is likely with this test current rather than 
with I v In the first few milliseconds after current zero, the hot products 
of the arc are still in a conducting state and this conductivity decreases, due 
to heat dissipation, slowly in comparison with the time constants of the 
transient voltage. In fuse testing, this conductivity produces additional 
damping of transients in the recovery voltage. However, the amount of 
damping is proportional to the characteristic impedance VLjC — 2itf L 
of the circuit. As a result, transients of higher natural frequency f are 
more effectively damped than those of lower frequency. These lower 
frequency transients are therefore sustained longer and, since these are 
imposed on the power-frequency recovery voltage, may produce an extra 
voltage stress on the blown fuse-link particularly if they persist until the 
crest value of the power-frequency recovery voltage is reached. Failures 
have occurred due to restrikes caused by this extra stress and the test 
specifications must therefore take account of this condition. 

50 



IS:9385(PartI)-1979 
D-7. The above considerations may be summarized as follows: 

The arc voltage of a fuse is not significantly affected by the TRV 
conditions of the circuit, except during the first few milliseconds after 
melting. 

Whether transients in the actual recovery jyoltage will be produced 
depends on the value of the breaking current. The highest transients are 
to be expected with test currents h of test duty 2, and the transients with 
the lower natural frequencies are the more harmful. If test current h is 
very high compared with / 2 , it does not usually produce transients. 

D-8. Since it was desirable that the TRV characteristics for fuses and 
circuit-breakers should be the same, it was decided to accept the standardi- 
zed values specified in. the relevant standard on high voltage circuit-breakers. 
However, bearing the above factors in mind, the following decisions were 
taken as regards the tests: 

a) Test Duty I — Since transients are not generated in the actual 
recovery voltage, the prospective TRV conditions are irrelevant 
and therefore not specified. The exceptional case, where the TRV 
conditions can influence the peak arc voltage, has been covered 
separately. 

b) Test Duty 2 — Since low-frequency transients have been shown 
to be more harmful, appropriate values to produce a typical 
low-frequency prospective TRV have been derived from the circuit 
parameters specified for circuit-breakers. Assuming single- 
frequency oscillations, these values represent \ to £ of the lowest 
frequencies for the relevant voltages. In addition, the figures of 
peak voltage have been based on an amplitude factor of 1*5, as 
compared with 1*4 in Table 4. 

c) Test Duty 3 — This publication does not specify TRV conditions; 
instead 6.5.1.2 specifies that a resistor is to be shunted across the 
circuit reactances in order to obtain complete suppression of 
oscillating transients. However, experience has shown that this 
suppression is sometimes not obtained, particularly in circuits of 
very low natural frequency, when the resistor is of the value 
specified. These values have therefore been modified to ensure 
that at least critical damping is achieved regardless of the natural 
frequency of the test circuit. 



51 



lS:9385(PartI)-1979 

APPENDIX E 

( Clause 6.8 ) 
ALTERNATIVE TESTS FOR STRIKERS 

E-0. The energy and travel requirements specified in 3.12 shall also T)e 
verified by the following test procedure. Only fuse-links having end-to-end 
striker circuits are covered. 

E-l. TEST SAMPLES 

E4.1 Tests shall be made on dummy fuse-links which are identical in all 
respects with the actual fuse-link except that: 

a) There are no main elements 

b) The series wire shall be reduced in length so that the resistance of 
the igniter wire plus the resistance of the series wire shall be 
approximately equal to 

R - 415 

where, Rn is the declared normal resistance of the striker 
circuit of the fuse-link type, 

U n is the rated voltage of the actual fuse-link ( The highest 
voltage rating where there is more than one rating specified for 
the fuse-link ). 

E-2. PREFERRED CHARACTERISTICS OF PENDULUM ( see 6.8 ). 

E-3. TEST CONDITIONS 

E-3.1 Tests shall be made on three dummy fuse-links. The test parameters 
shall be as follows: 

Applied voltage : 415 V ac i 10 percent 

Prospective current ; Not less than 100 A 
Power factor : Any convenient value 

Striker : After its specified free travel (Table 5) 

the striker shall hit the quiescently 
hanging hammer at its plane surface. 
The striker travel shall be directed to 
the centre of the percussion of the 
v machine and shall be normal to a 

plane defined by this centre of percus- 
sion and by the axis of oscillation 
of the pendulum 

E-4. TEST REQUIREMENTS 

E-4.1 Three tests shall be made. For each test the striker pin-travel and 
energy output shall be within the limits specified in 3.12. 

52 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters : 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 
Telephones : 3 31 01 31, 3 31 13 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

( Common to all Offices ) 
Regional Offices : Telephone 

♦Western ; Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ), 6 32 92 95 

BOMBAY 400093 
fEastem : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme Vlt M t V. I. P. Road, 

Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700054 
Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C 

CHANDIGARH 160036 
Southern : C. I. T. Campus, MADRAS 600113 



36 24 99 


/2 18 43 
\3 16 41 


f41 24 42 

i 41 25 19 

141 29 16 


f2 63 48 
\2 63 49 


22 48 05 



Branch Offices : 

Pushpak,' Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, 

AHMADABAD 380001 
'F' Block, Unity Bldg, Narasimharaja Square, 

BANGALORE 560002 

Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T. T. Nagar, 6 27 16 

BHOPAL 462003 
Plot No 82/83, Lewis Road, BHUBANESHWAR 751002 5 36 27 

53/5 Ward No. 29, R. G. Barua Road, 

5th Byelane, GUWAHATI 781003 ~~ 

5-8-56C L N. Gupta Marg, (Nampally Station Road), 22 10 83 

HYDERABAD 500001 
R14 Yudhister Marg, C Scheme, JAIPUR 302005 f 6 34 71 

16 98 32 
1 17/41 8B Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 / 21 68 76 

\21 82 92 
Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 800013 6 23 05 

Hantex Bldg ( 2nd Floor ), RIy Station Road, 52 27 

TRIVANDRUM 695001 
Inspection Office ( With Sale Point ): 

Institution of Engineers ( India ) Building, 1332 Shivaji Nagar, 5 24 35 
PUNE 410005 



•Sales Office in Bombay is at Novelty Chambers, Grant Road, 89 65 28 

Bombay 400007 

tSales Office in Calcutta is at 5 Chowringhee Approach, P. O. Princep 27 68 00 
Street, Calcutta 700072 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



