**************** 



* tOT£ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 



Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



IS 548-1 (1964) : Methods of sampling and test for oils and 
fats, Part I: Methods of sampling, physical and chemical 
tests [FAD 13: Oils and Oilseeds] 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 




5fR TT^ ^TT <sMHI | *ft ^fft ^TRT ^ff ^TT ^T^fT )f 

Bhartrhari — Nltisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 




<*i *3f», 




*?W!& 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS: 548 (Parti) -1964 

(Reaffirmed 2006) 

2010 

Indian Standard 

METHODS OF SAMPLING AND TEST 
FOR OILS AND FATS 

PART 1 SAMPLING, PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL TESTS 

(Revised) 

Fourteenth Reprint JULY 2007 
(Incorporating Amendment Nos. 1 to 4 and Including Amendment No. 5) 

UDC 665.3 : 543 



©Copyright 1976 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Grll October 1964 



0. Foreword 

1. Scope 

2. Terminology 

3. Samplino ... 

4. Quality of Reagent* 



IS t 548 ( Part I M964 
CONTENTS 

PAOK 

5 
6 

7 

9 

18 



5. Determination op Moisture Content ... ... 18 

6. Determination op Insoluble Impurities ... ... 28 

7. Determination of Acid Value and Free Fatty Acids ... 29 

8. Determination of Unsaponifiable Matter ... ... 31 

9. Determination of Melttno Point ... ... S3 

10. Determination of Refractive Index ... ... 35 

11. Determination of Specific Gravity ... ... 39 

12. Titre Test ... ... ... ... « 

13. Determination of Colour ... ... ... 45 

14. Determination of Iodine Value (Wijs) ... ... 47 

15. Determination of Saponification Value ... ... 50 

16. Determination of Acetyl Value and Hydroxy!. 

Value ... ... ... ... ... 52 

17. Determination of Allyl uothiocyanate ... ... 56 



IS: 548 (Part I)-1964 

RlGE 

18. Determination of Reichert-Meissl Value ... ... 57 

19. Determination of Polensxe Value ... ... 62 

21. Determination of Peroxide Value ... ... 63 



IS 1 548 (Part I )-1964 

Indian Standard 

METHODS OF SAMPLING AND TEST FOR 
OILS AND FATS 

FART I SAMPLING, PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL TESTS 

(Revised) 

Oils and Fats Sectional Committee, CAFDC 5 

Chaitmtn Rtprtintinj 

Dr J. S. Badami The Swastik Oil Mill* Ltd, Bombay 

JlffMMTJ 

Shri V. A. Parikh ( Alurnatt to 
Dr J. S. Badami ) 
Shri S. K. Bose Government Test House, Calcutta 

Shm V. V. Daw ( Alttmali ) 
Shm C. R. Dai The Vanaspati Manufacturer*' Association of India, 

Bombay 
Shm N. Desikachar The Tata Oil Mills Co Ltd, Bombay 

Dr B. G. Gunde ( Allrrnalt ) 
Dm K. C. Gulati Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi 

Shm K. P.Jain Directorate of Sugar & Vanaspati ( Ministry of Food 

& Agriculture ) 
Shm F.'G. T. Menezu ( AlUrnaU ) 
Shm R. K. Malik Directorate of Marketing & Inspection (Ministry of 

Food & Agriculture ) 
Shri K. L. Chatterjee ( Alttmtu) 
Dm B. D. Narang Central Committee for Food Standards ( Ministry of 

Health ) 
Dr M. S. Patel Indian Central Oilseeds Committee, Hyderabad 

Shri H. P. R. Raja Bombay Oilseeds and Oils Exchange Ltd, Bombav 

Shri Charandas V. Mariwala 
( AlUrnaU ) 
Dr H. G. R. Reddy Directorate General of Technical Development 

Shri P.V. Shrikanta Rao Khadi and Village Industries Commission, Bombay 

Shri L. R. Sud Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Shri A. P. Chakravertv ( AltmuU ) 
Shri A. Woodwark Hindustan Lever Ltd, Bombay 

Dr G. S. Hattiancoi ( Alltrmli ) 
Dr Saoqofal, Director, ISI ( Eit-tfficit Mtmktr ) 

Deputy Director ( Chem ) 

Stttmtatut 

Shri S. Surrakmanvan 

Assistant Director ( Chem ), ISI 

Shri R. C Mura 

Extra Assistant Director ( Chem ), ISI 

(CMlMB*t'M*Jtf«2) 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

1 



IStM8(P»rtI)-l%4 

( Gmmmm yrvM ^ft I ) 

Oil* and Fats Subcommittee, CAFDC 5 : 1 



Rtpriuntinf 
Da G. S. HATnAMOM Hindustan Lever Ltd, Bombay 

Ssnu V. U. Marralu (AlltmaU to 
Dr G. S. Harn'angdi ) 
Dm K. T. Aokava Regional Research Laboratory, Hyderabad 

Dm S. Rachavsndar Rao ( Atonal* ) 
Shu Gokulchand J. Aoarwal Bombay Oilseeds and Oils Exchange Lid, Bombay 
Smu Charandas V. Mariwala 
(Mitotan) 
Dr H. R. Cama Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 

Snai N. Dukackak The Tata Oil Mills «Jo Ltd, Bombay 

Dr B. G. Guhm ( AlltmaU ) 
Sum S. C. Ghose Indian Soap and Toiletries Makers' Association, 

Calcutta 
Shu R. K. Malm Directorate of Marketing & Inspection { Ministry of 

Food & Agriculture ) 
Smti K. L. Ckattkrju ( Alttrnatt ) 
Smu B. S. Mom The Vanaspati Manufacturers' Association of India, 

Bombay 
Dr H. G. R. Rrddy Directorate General of Technical Development 

Shu L. R. Sod Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Smu A. P. Chakravsrty ( AlltmaU ) 

Panel for Studying Indian Standards on Oils and Fats, CAFDC 5:1:1 

Ceattntr 
Dr S. M. Patel Hindustan Lever Ltd, Bombay 

Mtmbtn 

Sm N. Diskachar The Tata Oil Mills Co Ltd, Bombay 

Dr B. G. Gtmok ( AlUmaU ) 
Dr J. G. Kami In personal capacity ( Departmtnt of Chemical Ttehno- 

logy. University of Bombay, Bombay ) 
Saw R. K. Malik Directorate of Marketing & Inspection ( Ministry 

of Food & Agriculture) 
Shu K. L. Chattbkju ( AlltmaU ) 
Shu I. D. Sinok Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Ssnu R. P. Vsrma ( AlltmaU ) 
Dr A. R. Sumdararatan Central Committee for Food Standards ( Ministry of 

Health ) 



( Page 10, clause 11.0 ) — Add the following new matter at the end 
of the clause: 

' Method A shall be used as a referee method whereas Method B may be 
used for routine analysis.' 

( Page 24, clause 18.4 ) — Add the following new clauses after 18.4: 

■19. TEST FOR THE PRESENCE OF OIL SOLUBLE COLOURS IN 
OILS AND FATS 

19.0 General — Oil soluble colours are colours (both natural including 
nature identical and synthetic ) soluble in oils and fats. 

19.1 Outline of the Method — Oils, fats and other interfering substances 
are removed from the colours by solvent partition technique using dimethyl 
formamide and hexane (3:1), followed by alumina adsorption. The 
colours are detected by reversed phase paper chromatography. 

19.2 Apparatus 

19.2.1 For Extraction — a mechanical shaker. 

19.2.2 For Column Chromatography — a chromatographic tube made of 
glass ( 25 cm in diameter and 30 cm in length ). 

19.2.3 Separating Funnel — 250 ml capacity. 

19.3 Reagents 

19.3.1 Hexane 

19.3.2 Dimethyl Formamide 

19.3.3 Sodium Chloride Solution — saturated. 

19.3.4 Alumina Neutral, Brockmann, Activity l,for Example, Made by National 
Chemical Laboratory, Pane or of Equivalent Quality — activated at 100°C for 
4 hours. 

19.3.5 Diethyl Ether 

19.3.6 Ethyl Alcohol 

19.3.7 Ammonium Hydroxide Solution 

19.3.8 Methanol 

19.3.9 Petroleum Ether — B. P. 40 to 60°C. 

19.3.10 Liquid Paraffin 

19.3.11 Whatman No. 1 Filter Paper ( Reversed Phase ) — Prepared by 
soaking the paper in 5 percent liquid paraffin in petroleum ether and sub- 
sequent drying in air. 

19.3.12 Oil Soluble Colours — Butter yellow, Cres orange GN, Sudan IV, 
Gress Yellow GRN type, etc. 



19.3.13 Sodium Hydroxide Solution — 5 percent ( mjv ). 

19.3.14 Sulphuric Acid Solution — 13 N. 

19.3.15 Stannous Chloride Solution in Hydrochloric Acid — Dissolve 1128 g 
of stannous chloride in 170 ml of concentrated hydrochloric acid using heat 
if necessary. Dilute with water to 1 litre and add a few pieces of tin 
metal. 

19.3.16 Boric Acid Solution — Dissolve 4 g of boric acid in 100 ml of 
concentrated hydrochloric acid (relative density 1*19). 

19.3.17 Anhydrous Sodium Sulphate 

19.3.18 Saturated Solution of Antimony Trichloride in Chloroform 

19.3.19 Solvent Mixture — Diethyl Ether : Alcohol : water : : 5 : 3 : 2. 

19.3.20 Solvent Mixture — 80 percent ethyl alcohol in water. 
19.4 Procedure 

19.4.1 Extraction — Take about 2 to 3 g of the sample in a conical flask, 
add approximately 50 ml of hexane and then shake for about 10 minutes 
in a mechanical shaker. Filter it and concentrate the filtrate to about 
10 ml. 

19.4.1.1 Qualitative lest for presence of synthetic colours — Divide a 
portion of the hexane layer into 4 parts and treat with either 13 N sul- 
phuric acid or concentrated hydrochloric acid and water mixtures 4:1, 
2 : 1 or 1 : 1 respectively. If the acid layer or the whole extract changes 
shade or more particularly develops pink to reddish violet colour, the 
synthetic oil soluble colour may be suspected. 

19.4.2 Separation of Colours from Interfering Materials — Transfer the 
concentrated extract to a separating funnel and add to it dimethyl 
formamide ( DMF ) about three times the volume of the concentrated 
extract and shake vigorously. Keep it for a while for separation of the 
layers. The DMF layer contains the natural colour as well as the synthetic 
colours ( if present ), leaving oils and fats in the hexane layer. Now take 
the DMF layer and again shake it with hexane after addition of about 
20 ml of water. Retransfer colours ( both natural and synthetic ) this time 
to the hexane layer. If emulsion is formed add saturated sodium chloride 
solution. Concentrate the hexane layer and preferably repeat the above 
mentioned procedure. If oils and fats still linger in the sample, these will 
float above the coloured extract when the hexane layer is concentrated to 
0-5 ml. If oil is present repeat the above procedure till free from oil. 
Make the hexane solution to 10 ml. If curcumin or turmeric is suspected, 
shake the residual DMF layer after extraction with and separation of" 
hexane with diethyl ether and an extra amount of water, if necessary and 
collect the ether layer. Add the ether layer to the previous hexane. By 



this treatment any minute Curcumin and turmeric will come to the ether 
layer. 

19.4.3 Separation of Natural Colours from Synthetic Oil Soluble Colours — 
Clamp the chromatographic tube and pour 40 ml of hexane with the non- 
greasy stopcock in closed position. Place a cotton plug ( if no fritted glass 
is fixed in the tube ) firmly at the bottom of the tube. Pour 40 ml of 
hexane followed by anhydrous sodium sulphate to form a 2 to 3 cm layer. 
Now open the stopcock to give a trickle of solvent and tap the tube. Pour 
alumina sufficient to give a column of 10 cm length into the solvent with 
constant tapping. This will give a channel-free column. It is important 
that the top of the alumina is always under the solvent. When the solvent 
layer reaches about 1 cm above the alumina, pour the hexane extract of 
colours- carefully into the tube. Collect the eluent in a beaker. Continue 
the elution with four batches of 10 ml hexane. Concentrate the eluate 
containing oil soluble synthetic colours. After elution with hexane pass 
40 ml of another eluting solvent, namely, petroleum ether : acetone (1:1) 
for complete elution. 

19.4.4 Detection of Synthetic Oil Soluble Colours — Cut a reversed phase 
chromatography paper to a size of 20 x 20 cm. Then draw a straight line 
by a lead pencil on the paper leaving away 3 cm from the bottom. Spot 
the concentrated extract ( say 10 ft\ or more according to the colour 
present on the solution ) and also some known oil soluble colours on the 
line drawn on the reversed phase chromatography paper leaving 1 cm 
distance from each other. Then make the paper to a cylindrical shape, 
staple it and dip in any one of the solvents ( see 19.3.19 and 19.3.20 ) for 
ascending chromatography. Run for 10 cm. The development in tne solvent 
given under 19.3.19 takes 45 minutes and that in solvent prescribed 
under 19.3.20 takes one hour. Take out the paper, dry in air and detect 
the colour by comparing with the known colour in respect of shade and 
Rf values. 

19.4.5 Detection of Natural Colours — Elute the natural colours absorbed on 
the column by the solvent methanol : ammonium hydroxide (9:1) and 
then examine for natural colours. If colour of the column changes to red- 
violet after passing the above mentioned solvent, it confirms the presence 
of curcumin or turmeric. 

19.4.5.1 Detection of annatto, turmeric and curcumin — Evaporate the 
extracted layer ( see 19.4.5 ) to dryness, add 10 ml petroleum ether and 
shake a 7 ml portion of the solution with sodium hydroxide solution. 
Take out the alkali layer and divide it into two portions to check for the 
presence of annatto, turmeric and curcumin. Dilute the first portion with 
equal volume of water, add a piece of clean white adsorbent cotton to 
it and keep it overnight. If after washing gently in water the cotton piece 
continues to retain straw colour which turns pink by a drop of stannous 
chloride solution, it confirms the presence of annatto. To the second 



portion add boric acid solution to make the solution acidic. If red colour 
appears, turmeric is present and if pink colour appears it indicates the 
presence of curcumin. Sometimes turmeric and curcumin are not eluted 
if present in small amount. Notice the change of colour of the column 
for their detection. 

19.4.5.2 Detection of carotene — To the non-alkali treated portion add 
saturated solution of antimony trichloride in chloroform. If blue colour 
appears, carotene is present,' 



( CAFDC 5 ) 



Printed at : Prabhat Offset Press, New Delhi-2 



IS>548(PartI)-1964 

Indian Standard 

METHODS OF SAMPLING AND TEST FOR 
OILS AND FATS 

PART I SAMPLING, PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL TESTS 

( Revised ) 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This revised Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 22 April 1964, after the draft finalized by the Oils and Fats 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council 
and the Agricultural and Food Products Division Council. 

0.2 This standard was first published in 1954. With the rapid progress in 
the industry of fatty oils in this country and with the new analytical 
techniques devised to control the quality of the oils and check the trends 
towards adulteration, the Sectional Committee responsible for drafting this 
standard decided to issue a revised standard in order to keep abreast of the 
latest developments in the field. 

0,2.1 In view of the periodical review and revision of methods for 
detection of adulteration in vegetable oils and fats, the concerned Com- 
mittee decided to issue this standard in three parts, namely, Part I Methods 
of sampling, physical and chemical tests; Part II Methods for purity tests; 
and Part III Methods of analysis of vegetable oils and fats by gas liquid 
chromatography (GLC) technique. This change has been effected 
through Amendment No. 3 to this standard. 

0.3 Taking into consideration the views of producers and consumers of oils 
and fats as also the views of the testing authorities and of the technologists 
the Sectional Committee responsible for the preparation of this standard 
felt that the methods of test should be related to the current practices and 
the need to improve them in the cpuntry in this field. Due consideration 
has also been given to the need for alignment with the methods of test 
prescribed by the Central Committee for Food Standards, Ministry of 
Health, and the Directorate of Marketing and Inspection, Ministry of Food 
and Agriculture, Government of India, as also for international co-ordina- 
tion among standards prevailing in different countries of the world. 
These considerations led the Sectional Committee to draw freely from the 
following standards and publications: 

B.S. 627 : 1953 Sampuno or Fat* and Fatty Oils. British 
Standards Institution. 



IS i 548 ( Part I )-1964 

B.S. 684: 1958 Methods op Analyw or Oils and Fats. British 
Standards Institution. 

B.S. 756 : 1952 Dean and Stark Apparatus. British Standards 
Institution. 

India. Ministry of Food and Agriculture. Methods of Sampling 
and Testing Vegetable Oils and Fats under Agmark ( Marketing 
Series No. 78 ). New Delhi. Manager of Publications, 1952. 

India. Ministry of Food and Agriculture. Methods of Sampling 
and Testing Butter-Fat ( Ghee ) and Butter under Agmark 
( Marketing Series No. 81 ). New Delhi. Manager of Publica- 
tions, 1953. 

Mitra, S. N. and Sen Gupta, P. N. Detection of Hydrocyanic Acid 
in Edible Oils ( Mustard Oil ). Science and Culture. Vol. 28, 
No. 5, P. 241 ( 1962 ). 

Mehlenbacher, V. C. and Hopper, T. H. Official and Tentative 
Methods of the American Oil Chemists' Society, Second Edition 
including Additions and Revisions — 1947 to 1963 inclusive. 
Chicago. American Oil Chemists' Society. 

0.4 This standard is intended for introduction in India of uniform methods 
of sampling and test for oils and fats. It does not deal with the specifica- 
tions of the materials, but prescribes only the methods of determining 
whether the material conforms to the requirements pf the individual stand- 
ard and thus forms a necessary adjunct to the series of Indian Standard 
specifications for individual oils and fats. 

0.5 Wherever a reference to any Indian Standard appears in this standard, 
it shall be taken as a reference to the latest version of the standard. 

0.6 In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with 
this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded 
off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960 Rules for Rounding Off 
Numerical Values ( Rtvised). 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard lays down the methods of sampling and test for indivi- 
dual oils, fats and fatty materials. It contains definitions of terms used 
in trade and industry and prescribes the methods for determining moisture, 
insoluble impurities, acid value and free fatty acids, unsaponifiable matter, 
melting point, refractive index, .specific gravity, titre of mixed fatty acids, 
colour, iodine value (Wijs), saponification value, acetyl value and 
hydroxyl value, allyl irothiocyanate content, Reichert-Meissl value and 



IS:548(PartI).lM4 

Polenske value 

1.2 Test methods, neither prescribed in this standard nor specified in 
standards for individual materials, shall be subject to agreement between 
the purchaser and the supplier. 

1-3 Should any inconsistency be found to exist between the methods 
prescribed in this standard and those prescribed in the standard for an 
individual material, the latter shall prevail. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply. 

2.1 Acetyl Value — The number of milligrams of potassium hydroxide 
required to neutralize the acetic acid liberated by the hydrolysis of one 
gram of the acctylated oil or fat ( stt 23 ). 

2.1.1 Acetyl value of an oil or fat is a measure of the hydroxyl content 
of the material. 

2.2 Add Value and Free Fatty Adds — The number of milligrams of 
potassium hydroxide required to neutralize the free acid present in one 
gram of the oil or fat under the prescribed conditions. 

2.2.1 The acidity of the oil or fat indicated by its acid value is frequently 
expressed as free fatty acids present in the sample. 

2 J Hydroxyl Value — The number of milligrams of potassium hydroxide 
required to neutralize the acetic acid capable of combining by acetylation 
with one gram of the oil or fat ( set also 2.1 ). 

2.3.1 Hydroxyl value is equivalent to the hydroxyl content of the 
material based on the weight of the unacetylated fat. 

2.4 Ineoluble Impurities — Dirt, meal and other foreign substances 
which are insoluble in kerosine and petroleum ether under the conditions 
of the prescribed test. 

2.5 Iodine Value ( Wijs ) — The number of grams of iodine, absorbed 
per 100 grams of the oil or fat, when determined by using Wijs solution. 

2.5.1 The iodine value of the oil or fat gives an indication of the degree 
of unsaturation of the constituent fatty glycerides. It is customary to give 
the method employed for its determination. Wijs method is applicable to 
all normal oils and fats not containing conjugated systems. 

2.6 Melting Point — The temperature at which the oil or fat softens or 
becomes sufficiently fluid to slip or run as determined by the open-tube 
capillary-slip method. In the case of the closed-tube complete-fusion 



IS > 548 ( Part I )-1964 

method, it is the temperature at which the oil or fat becomes perfectly 
clear and liquid. 

2.7 Moisture Content — The moisture and any other material contained 
in the oil or fat which is volatile under the conditions of the prescribed 
test. 

2 .8 Polenake Value — The number of millilitres of 0*1 N aqueous 
sodium hydroxide solution required to neutralize the steam volatile, 
water insoluble fatty acids distilled from 5 g of an oil or fat under the 
precise conditions specified in the method. 

2.8.1 The Polenskc value is the measure of the steam volatile and water 
insoluble fatty acids, chiefly caprylic, capric and lauric acids, present in the 
oil or fat. 

2.9 Refractive Index — The ratio of the velocity of light in vacuum to 
the velocity of light in the oil or fat; more generally, it expressed the ratio 
between the sine of the angle of incidence to the sine of the angle of refrac- 
tion when a ray of light of a known wave-length ( usually 589*3 mp, the 
mean of the D lines of sodium ) passes from air into the oil or fat. 

2.10 Reichert-Meiaal Value — The number of millilitres of 01 N sodium 
hydroxide solution required to neutralize the steam volatile, water soluble 
fatty acids distilled from 5 g of an oil or fai under the precise condition* 
specified in the method. 

2.10.1 Reichert-MeissI value is a measure of water soluble steam 
volatile fatty acids, chiefly butyric and caproic acids, present in oil or fat. 

2.11 Saponification Value — The number of milligrams of potassium 
hydroxide required to saponify completely one gram of the oil or fat. 

2.12 Specific Gravity 

2.12.1 Specific Gravity of an Oil — The ratio of the weight in air of a 
given volume of the oil at 30°C to the weight in air of an equal volume of 
water at 30°C. 

2.12.2 Specific Gravity of a Fat — The ratio of the weight in air of a given 
volume of the fat at 95°C to the weight in air of an equal volume of 
water at 30°C. 

2.13 Titre — The highest temperature attained under standard conditions, 
during the solidification of the mixed fatty acids obtained from the oil or 
fat. 

2.14 Unaaponifiable Matter — The fraction of substances in oils and 
fats which is not saponified by caustic alkali, but is soluble in ordinary fat 
solvents. 

8 



IS t 548 ( Part I )-W64 

2.14.1 It includes the higher aliphatic alcohols, sterols, pigments, 
hydrocarbons and resinous matter. 

3. SAMPLING 

3.0 General — It is very difficult to lay down detailed directions for 
sampling oils and fats that will encompass all conditions and circumstances 
which may confront the individual charged with the responsibility of 
taking the sample. There are many instances in which the experience and 
judgement of the individual should prevail. There are, however, certain 
general rules relating to the drawing, preparation, storage and handling of 
samples which should always govern if the sample is to be representative. 
These are described under 3.1 to 3.8. 

3.1 General Precautions in Sampling 

3.1.1 All sampling instruments should preferably be made of stainless 
steel; if made of copper, brass or bronze, these should be nickel-plated. 

3.1.2 AH sampling apparatus shall be clean and dry when used. Sam- 
pling instruments may be cleaned with hot soapy water or other detergent, 
care being taken to wash away the last traces with scalding hot water. If 
a source of steam is available, the instruments may receive a final cleansing 
in a jet of steam and it is recommended that this procedure be carried out 
when edible oils are sampled and where the taste is likely to be of primary 
importance. 

3.13 Samples shall not be taken in an exposed place. The samples, the 
material being sampled, the sampling instruments and containers for 
samples shall be protected from adventitious contamination. The test 
samples shall be placed in suitable clean and dry containers. 

3.1.4 Samples shall be stored in such a manner that they are protected 
from light, temperature fluctuations and other abnormal conditions. 

3.1.5 Sample containers shall be so rilled that the air space above the 
liquid level shall be 5 to 10 percent of the capacity of the sample 
containers. 

3.2 Sampling Instruments 

3.2.1 Sampling Bottle or Can — This instrument is suitable for sampling 
large vessels arid tanks of liquid oil. It consists of a weighted bottle 
or metal container with removable stopper or cork, to which is attached 
a suitable chain, pole or cord. This device is lowered to the various 
desired depths at which the stopper is removed and the container is 
allowed to fill (se« Fig. 1 ). 

3.2.2 Sampling Fubts — The recommended forms of sampling tubes 
are (a) closed-type sampling tubes, undivided or divided, for sampling 

9 



IS.548(PmrtI)-1964 

liquids and semi-liquids that may not be homogeneous; and (b) open type 
sampling tube for sampling homogeneous liquids. 




Fio. 1 Sampling Bottle or Can 

3.2.2.1 Closed-type sampling tube, undivided — It consists of two con- 
centric metallic tubes closely fitted into each other throughout their 
entire length, so that one tube may be rotated within the other. Longi- 
tudinal openings of about one-third the circumference are cut in both 
tubes. In one position the openings in the two tubes coincide; the sam- 
pling tube is open when in this position and admits the material. By 
turning the inner tube through an angle of 180°, it becomes a sealed con- 
tainer. The inner tube may have a diameter of 20 to 40 mm and is 
undivided along its length to serve as a single container ( see Fig. 2 ). 

The two concentric tubes are provided with ports at their bottom 
ends, so placed that it becomes possible to drain the material contained in 
the instrument through them, when the longitudinal openings coincide. 

The length of the instrument should be such as to enable it to reach 
the bottom of the container being sampled. 

The instrument is inserted closed, the material is admitted by opening 
it, and finally, it is closed and withdrawn. 

10 



CLOSED 



OPEN 



SECTION XX 



A 



1 



! 



IS:M8(P*r«I)-1964 





PORTS 



OPEN 



CLOSED 



BOTTOM VIEWS 
Fro. 2 Clomd-Tyfb Sampuno Tobb- 



UNDtVIDEO 



3.2*2.2 Clostd-typ* sampling lube, divided — It is also of metal and 
has D-shaped cross-section. It is provided with compartments along 
its length and is opened and closed by means of a closely-fitting 
shutter which moves up and down throughout the entire length. It may 
be from 25 to SO mm wide (/« Fig. 3 ). 

11 



IS 1 548 (Part I). 1964 




ENLARGED 
SECTION XX 



ENLARGEO 
SECTION YY 



<S> J 



X 
1 



1 1 
M 

ii 



M 

I i 
i i 
1 I 
I I 

M 

i i 
• 

n 

1 1 

M 
t l 
I I 
M 
I I 
i 

M 
l 
M 



X 

i 




9 



i 



i 



TUBE SHUTTER 

Fio. 3 GuxBD-TyrB SamtukoTObs — Dmott 



IS.548(Part I)-1964 

The instrument is inserted closed, the shutter is pulled out to admit 
the material, and the tube u then closed and withdrawn. 

3.2.2.3 Optn-lype sampling tube for homogeneous liquids — It is made 
of metal or thick glass, and may ' be of 20 to 40 mm diameter and 
400 to 750 mm length. The upper and lower ends are conical and 
narrow down to 6 to 12 mm diameter. Handling is facilitated by two 
rings at the upper end. For taking a sample, the instrument is first closed 
at the top with the thumb or a stopper and lowered until the desired depth 
is reached. It is then opened for a short time to admit the material and 
anally closed and withdrawn ( see Fig. 4 ). 

3.2.3 Sanipling Scoops — These instruments are of the open type and 
are suitable for taking samples of naturally occurring vegetable fats or 




6TO UmmDIA 



o 
o 



20 TO 40 mm 0IA 



-3L % 



>TO40mmPlA 
Fro. 4 Open-Type Sampuno Tube for Homogeneous Liquid* 



IS 1 548 (Part 1>1964 

hydrogenated vegetable oils. They »re of metal, of semi-circular or 
C-shaped cross-section, and will bore out a core of the sample through 
the material being sampled ( u€ Fig. 5 A and 5B ). 



I O I 



i O i 



Uhnmm/' "^ 



IT 



' > 



Fio. 5A Sam puno Scoop 



Fio. 5B Sampumo Scoop 



S 3 Sample Coetaiaera 

3.9.1 The samples shall be packed in clean dry containers, preferably of 
glass or tin-plate, the sample containers should be almost but not completely 



14 



IS:548(Part I)-1964 

filled. Glass bottles of 500 ml capacity are recommended for liquid oils 
and glass jars for solid vegetable oils or fats. 

3.3.2 All sample containers shall be fitted with suitable tight stoppers. 
Rubber stoppers should not be used to close the containers. In the case of 
glass containers, glass stoppers or rtew good quality velvet corks should be 
used and, in the case of tin containers, tin caps should be suitably soldered 
on the top, avoiding contamination of fat with acid flux. Use of resin as 
a flux is recommended. Tinfoil or grease-proof paper may be wrapped 
round the corks to prevent contact of the sample with them, and it is 
recommended that this be done in the case of refined or deodorized edible 
oils. In the case of oils with high acid value, neither metal containers 
nor tinfoil is recommended. 

3 3 -3 The sample containers shall be sealed with sealing wax in such a 
manner that it is not possible to remove the contents and the label without 
breaking the imprint of the seal. 

3.4 Scale of Sampling 

3.4.1 Lot — All the containers in a single consignment of one type and 
grade of material drawn from a single batch of manufacture shall constitute 
the lot. If a consignment is declared to consist of different batches of 
manufacture, the batches shall be marked separately and the groups of 
containers in each batch shall constitute separate lots. Shrnild the con- 
signment not be uniform in quality, the parts of the consignment which 
appear to be similar may be collected together and each quality treated 
as a separate lot. 

3.4.2 Gross Sample — The general procedure for taking a gross sample is 
to draw a number of portions from the bulk quantity ( see 3.1.2.1 ) or a 
number of portions form all or serve'ral packages ( see 3.4.2.2 ), and mix 
them thoroughly. Representative portions of the gross sample shall be 
transferred to air-tight containers of suitable size for the test samples as 
described under 3.6. 

3.4.2.1 Gross sample from bulk quantities — shall be drawn in quantities 
of not less than 2 kg per 2 000 kg or less. 

3.4.2.2 Gross sample from small packages — When sampling from drums, 
barrels, etc, the packages from which the samples are drawn shall be 
selected at random from the lot. The following schedule is recommended 
for the number of packages to be sampled: 

Number of Packages in the Lot Number of Packages to be Sampled 

1 to 4 Each package 

5 to 100 At least 20 percent with a minimum 

of 4 packages 
More than 100 At least 10 percent with a minimum 

of 20 packages 

15 



ISt548(PartI)*lM4 

By agreement between the purchaser and the supplier, each package 
may be sampled. A minimum of 0-1 percent of the total quantity in the 
lot or 2 kg, whichever is greater, shall be drawn as the gross sample. 

3.5 Procedure 

3.5.1 Oils in Bulk in Storage Tanks and Tank Wagons 

a) Liquid oils 

1 ) Stationary — Lower the closed sampling bottle or can ( see 
Fig. 1 ) slowly to the required depth, open and fill it at 
that depth. Three samples shall be obtained at levels of 
one-tenth of the depth of the liquid from the top surface 
( top sample ), one-half of the depth ( middle sample ) and 
nine-tenths of the depth of the liquid from the top surface 
( lower sample ). If foots or water or both are present, a 
bottom sample shall also be taken at the lowest point of the 
container (bottom sample). All the samples shall be 
mixed together in a clean dry container, and shall be 
reduced as described under 3.6. 

2) During loading or unloading — If the product is completely 
liquid and free flowing, the pet-cock method of sampling 
may be used. A bleeder line with a pet-cock ( 10 mm __ 
minimum inside diameter ) is located in a vertical section 
of the pumping line through which the product is conti- 
nuously flowing. Adjust the pet-cock so that a continuous 
stream of sample flows freely without dripping during the 
entire pumping period. Collect the sample in a clean 
dry container and protect it from dirt, water or other 
contamination. Mix the entire sample thoroughly and 
reduce it as described under 3.6. 

In the event of a pet-cock not being available, use a conveni- 
ent container and withdraw approximately 0-5 kg portions from 
the discharge end of the pipe at regular intervals as the product 
is entering or leaving the tank wagon. 

b) Solid oils or fats — It is not possible to sample solid materials in 
tank wagons correctly. If possible, the material should be lique- 
fied and then sampled as described under 3.5.1(a). 'When 
necessary to sample solid materials, use the sampling scoop 
( set Fig. 5A and 5B ) and withdraw several portions from the 
tank wagon taken vertically and obliquely towards the ends of 
the wagon. The scoop should pass through the stock until it 
touches the sides of the wagon so that a complete core is taken. 
Soften (but do not milt) and mix all portions thoroughly, and 
reduce the sample as described under 3.6. 

16 



IS i 548 ( Part I J-1964 

3 J5 JZ Oils in Bamls, Coda, Drums aid Titrces 

a) Liquid or semi-solid oils — Roll the container to mix the contents 
and insert the sampling tube ( see Fig. 4 ) slowly through the 
bung hole or any other convenient opening. If possible, the 
sample should be drawn from end to end. As soon as the tube 
is fully inserted, close the upper constriction with the thumb or 
a stopper, withdraw the tube and transfer the sample into a 
clean dry container. Take several portions in this maimer from 
this and other packages recommended under 3.4.2.2. Mix 
thoroughly and reduce the sample as described under 3.6. 

b) Solid oils or fats — Remove the bung and insert the sampling 
scoop ( see Fig. 5A and 5B ) through the opening, push it through 
to the opposite end or side, turn it in a complete circle and with- 
draw with the sample. If possible, the sample should be drawn 
from end to end. Collect several such portions from this and other 
packages recommended under 3.4.2.2. Soften ( but do not melt ) 
and mix thoroughly, and finally reduce the sample as described 
under 3.6. 

3.5.3 Very Hard Fats in Bags, Barrels or Casks — If the material is in the 
form offtakes or loose lumps or pieces, take grab samples of uniform and 
proportional size from packages as directed under 3.4.2.2. If the material 
is in the form of large pieces, it should be broken up before taken grab 
samples. Mix thoroughly, quarter, and finally reduce the sample as 
described under 3.6. 

3.6 Test and Referee Samples 

3.6.1 Size of Test Sample — The minimum size for each test sample shall 
be 0-5 kg. 

3.6.2 Preparation of Test Sample — Normally, all the samples drawn as 
described under 3.5 shall be put into a clean dry receptacle, such as a 
bucket or tub, and the contents of this receptacle shall be thoroughly mixed 
and at least four uniform samples ( test samples ) shall be drawn there- 
from. One test sample shall be sent to the purchaser and one to the 
supplier. 

3.6.2.1 The supplier shall have the right to be represented at the 
time of sampling. 

3.6.2.2 The material left over after the preparation of the test samples 
shall be at the disposal of the supplier. 

3.6 3 Referee Sample — Two of the test samples bearing the seals of the 
purchaser and the supplier shall constitute the referee samples, to be used 
in case of dispute between the purchaser and the supplier, and shall be 
kept at a place agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier. 

17 



IS<548(P«rtI)-lft4 

3.7 Test for Acceptance 

3.7.1 Examination and Tests — The purchaser may separately examine test 
samples of each of the separate qualities ( see 3.4.2.2 ) for compliance with 
the requirements of the individual specification, or he may prepare, for 
the purpose of such examination and at any stage of the progress of the 
examination, a composite sample representing the whole of the consign- 
ment, by mixing the test samples. 

3.7.2 Criterion/or Judgement — The lot shall be considered to conform to 
the requirements of this standard if the test sample'satisfies all the require- 
ments and passes all the tests. If two or more qualities are examined 
from a consignment and if one or more of them do not comply with the 
requirements of the specification for that particular material, the purchaser 
shall have the right to accept only that portion which complies with the 
requirements, or accept or reject the whole of the consignment. 

3.8 Marking of Sample Containers 

3.8.1 Each sample container after filling shall be sealed and marked 
with full details of sampling, the number of packages sampled, the date of 
sampling, and other particulars of the consignment. 

3.8.2 A label bearing the particulars given under 3.8.1 shall be attach- 
ed and sealed to every sample container. A recommended form of label 
is g'ven below: 

a) Name and grade of material 

b) Consigner 

c) Size and particulars of consignment 

d) Identification oflot 

c) Number of packages sampled 

f) Place of sampling 

g) Date of sampling 

4. QUALITY OF REAGENTS 

4.1 Unless otherwise specified, pure chemicals and distilled water [see 
IS: 1070-1960 Specification for Water, Distilled Quality (Revised)] shall 
be employed in tests. 

Note — ' Pure chemicals ' shall mean chemicals that do not contain impurities which 
affect the results of analysis. 

5. DETERMINATION OF MOISTURE CONTENT 

5.0 General — Three methods, namely, (a) air-oven method, (b) hot- 
plate method, and (c) distillation method are employed. The first two 

18 



IS : 548 ( Part I )-1964 

methods give the moisture and volatile matter content together while the 
distillation method gives only the water content. The hot-plate method is 
useful for a rapid preliminary screening. 

5.0.1 Applicability — The air-oven method is applicable to all the 
ordinary oils and fats which have a relatively low moisture content ( below 
one percent), but not to drying or semi-drying oils or oils of the coconut 
oil group. The hot-plate method is applicable to all the ordinary oils and 
fats including coconut oil. Neither of these two methods is applicable to 
solvent extracted oik and fats which may contain residues from solvents 
with fairly high boiling points. The distillation method is applicable to all 
normal oils and fats, including emulsions, for the determination of moisture 
only as differentiated from moisture and volatile matter. This method is 
not applicable to samples of oils or fats containing volatile substances 
miscible with water. 

5.0.2 Precaution — Since water tends to settle in samples of oib or fats 
which have softened or melted, care shall be taken to mix the samples 
thoroughly so as to distribute the water uniformly. Soften the sample with 
gentle heat ( but do not melt ), and mix thoroughly. This general precaution 
is applicable to all the three methods. 

5.0 3 Referee Method — In cases of dispute' and unless otherwise agreed to 
between the purchaser and the supplier, the moisture content shall be 
determined by the distillation method. 

5.1 Air-Oven Method 

5.1.1 Apparatus 

5.1.1.1 Moisture dish — made of aluminium sheet about 0*45 to 
0*56 mm thickness, 70 to 80 mm in diameter and 20 mm deep; provided 
with tight-fitting slip-over cover. 

5.1.1.2 Desiccator — containing an efficient desiccant, such as phos- 
phorus pentoxide. 

5.1.1.3 Air-oven — preferably electrically heated, with temperature 
control device. 

5.1.2 Procedure — Weigh accurately about 10 g of the oil or fat into a 
moisture dish which has been dried previously, cooled in the desiccator 
vnd then weighed. Place the dish in the air-oven for approximately one 
hour at 105 ± 1°C. Remove the dish from the oven, cool in the desiccator 
to room temperature and weigh. Repeat this procedure but keep the dish 
in the oven only for half an hour each time until the difference between 
the two successive weighings does not exceed one milligram. Preserve 
the heated oil or fat for the determination of insoluble impurities (see 6) 

19 



IS: 548 (Part I )-1964 

5.1.3 Calculation 

Moisture and volatile matter ioOm, 
content, percent by weight » — ^=- 

where 

w = loss in weight in g of the material upon drying, and 
W = weight in g of the material taken for the test. 

5.2 Hot-Plate Method 

5.2.1 Apparatus 

5.2.1.1 Glass beaker— 100 to 150 ml capacity. 

5.2.1.2 Small glass rod 

5.2.1.3 Desiccator — containing an efficient desiccant, such as phos- 
phorus pentoxide. 

5.2.1.4 Electric hot-plate — with variable heat control. 

5.2.2 Procedure — Weigh accurately about 10 g of the oil or fat into the 
glass beaker which has been previously dried along with the small glass 
rod, cooled in the desiccator, and weighed. Heat the sample on the 
electric hot-plate, stirring continuously with the glass rod. Avoid spatter- 
ing of the oil or fat which may result from too rapid an ebullition of 
moisture. The apparent end point is judged by the cessation of the rising 
hubbies of steam as well as by the absence of foam. Alternatively, judge the 
end point by placing a clean, dry watch-glass on top of the beaker and 
observing when no further condensation takes place on the watch-glass. 
When the apparent end point has been reached, heat momentarily to the 
point of incipient smoking taking care not to overheat. Cool to room 
temperature in the desiccator and weigh. Preserve the heated oil or fat 
for the determination of insoluble impurities (j«6). 

5.2.3 Calculation 

Moisture and volatile matter .qq 
content, percent by weight = — r^-. 

where 

w =■ loss in weight ing of the material upon drying, and 
W »= weight in g of the material taken for the test. 

5.3 Distillation Method 

5.3.1 Apparatus — The apparatus consists of a glass flask heated by 
suitable means and provided with a reflux condenser discharging into a 
trap and connected to the flask. The connections between the trap and 

20 



IS : 548 ( Part I >1964 

the condenser and the flask should be interchangeable ground glass joints. 
The trap serves to collect and measure the condensed water, and to return 
the solvent to the flask. The assembly of the apparatus is shown in Fig. 6, 
and the various components are described below: 

a) Flask — a 500- to 1 000-ml flask of the shape shown in Fig. 6, made 
of hard resistance glass, well annealed and as free as possible from 
striae and similar defects. 

b) Condenser — a glass water-cooled reflux type condenser, of the 
design and dimensions shown in Fig. 6A. The only mandatory 
dimensions for the condenser are the external diameters of the 
inner tube and of the jacket, which shall be 16 to 17 mm and 23 to 
25 mm respectively. The joints A and B should be neatly finished 
as shown in Fig. 6A, particularly the bore at B shall have the 
minimum disturbance. The shoulder above the cone of joint 
D shall be elongated as shown in Fig. 6A to avoid a sharp re- 
entrant shape which may restrict the free flow of liquid down the 
inner wall. The cone shall be extended beyond the length appro- 
priate to the joint D, and the lower end ground at an angle of 
approximately 60° to the axis. The drainage tip shall be at the 
front of the condenser when the lower water connection is to the 
left, and the finish shall be either smooth or fire-polished. When 
inserted into the trap, the tip of the condenser shall be 6 to 7 mm 
above the surface of the liquid in the trap after distillation condi- 
tions have been established. The nominal dimensions of the 
joint D are given below: 

Nominal Dia Nominal Dia Nominal Length of 

of Large End of Small End of Ground Z one Measured 

of Ground Zone Ground Z one Axially 

mm mm mm 

188 16-2 26 

c) Receivers — otherwise called the trap, made of hard resistance 
glass, well annealed and as free as possible from striae and similar 
defects, provided with ground glass joints, with the shape, 
dimensions and tolerances given in Fig. 6B and 6C; consisting 
essentially of the upper chamber, together with the tube and 
ground joint leading tc the flask, and the graduated tube. 

The receivers shall be of two sizes, namely, 2 ml capacity 
and 10 ml capacity (see Fig. 6B and 6C)'. The mandatory 
dimensions and tolerances for the receivers shall be as given in 
Table 1. 

21 



ISsM8(PartlV1964 



\tl 



■CONOENSER 



RECEIVER 




OISTMATWN 
FLASK 



Fio. 6 Typical Ambmbly of Dban and Stabs Appabatui 



22 



IS: 518 (Part 1)4964 



25 



23 TO 25 OD 

WALL 1 TO 1»5 
THICK 



2S0 



16 TO 17 00 
WALL 0-7 T01 
THICK 



B LENGTH 

J 




All dimensions in millimetres. 
Fio. 6A Condinssk 



The shoulder of the upper chamber of the receiver immedia- 
tely below the conical joint shall be finished square, as shown in 
Fig. 6B and 6C. The graduated portion of the receiver shall be 
cylindrical throughout its length. The bottom of the graduated 
tube of the 2-ml receiver shall be sealed, the end of the tube 
being approximately hemispherical in shape. The graduated 
scales on the receivers shall be numbered and subdivided as shown 
in Fig. 6B and 6C. The graduation marks shall be fine cleanly 
etched permanent lines of uniform thickness lying in planes at 
right angles to the axis of the tube. The graduation marks shall 
be confined to the cylindrical portion of the tube and there shall be 



23 



18 1 548 (Part 1>1964 



TABLE 1 MANDATORY DIMENSIONS AND TOLERANCES FOR RECEIVER 


[Caw* 5.3.1(c)] 






St No. CHARACTUURta 


RlCBIVBR 




2-ml 


10-ml 


0) (2) 


(3) 


W 


i) Volume, equivalent to smallest sub- 
division, ml 


005 


01 


ii) Scale length, mm 


95*10 


110*10 


iii) Length of cylindrical tube above upper 
graduation mark, mm 


10 to 15 


10 to 30 


iv) Tolerance on capacity, ml 


*0-02 


*006 


v) Maximum permissible leakage rate of 
stopcock, ml/min 


— 


0004 



no evident irregularity in their spacing. In these receivers the 
numbered graduation marks shall be carried completely roJnd the 
tube, the shortest graduation marks shall be carried halfway 
round the tube, and the graduation marks of intermediate length 
shall be carried approximately two-thirds of the way round the 
tube and shall project equally at each end beyond the shortest 
graduation marks. 

The capacity corresponding to any graduation mark is defined 
as the volume of water at 27°C, expressed in millilitres, required 
to fill the graduated portion to that mark at 27°C, the axis of the 
graduated portion being vertical and the lowest point of the water 
meniscus being set on the graduation mark. In the case of 10-ml 
receiver, the volume of the bore of the stopcock key and the 
volume of the jet below the stopcock shall not be included as part 
of the measured volume. 

The error at any point on the receiver scale, and also the 
difference between the errors at any two points on the scale, shall 
not exceed the figures given for the receivers in Table 1. 

For the 10-ml receiver, the stopcock shall be of the 2 mm 
oblique bore having the general design shown in Fig. 6B and 6C. 
The rate of leakage, tested with the stopcock free from grease, the 
barrel and key wetted with water, the receiver filled initially with 
water to the top of the scale, and the key in either fully shut-off 
position, shall not exceed the figures given in Table 1. 

24 



IS:548 (Partl>1964 




AU dimensions in millimetres. 
Fio. 6B 2-mI Rtcstvs* 



25 



13 1 548 (Part 1)4964 




All dimcnsioni in millimetres. 

Fio. 6G 10-mI Receiver 



26 



IS t 548 ( Part I )-1964 

Each receiver shall have permanently ard legibly marked 
on it: 

1) the abbreviation * ml ', 

2) the inscription '27 C' to indicate that the receiver is gra- 
duated for content at 27°C, and 

3) an identification number shall also appear on the key. 

d) Heat source — the source of heat may be either an oil-bath or an 
electric hentcr provided with a sliding rheostat or other means 
of heat control. The temperature of the oil in the bath should not 
be very much higher than the boiling point of xylene or toluene, 
whichever solvent is used. 

e) Copper wire — long enough to extent through the condenser, with 
one end twisted into a spiral. The diameter of the spiral should 
be such that it fits snugly within the graduated portion of the 
receiver and yet may be moved up and down. 

5.3.2 Reagents 

5.3.2.1 Potassium dichromate- sulphuric acid cleaning solution 

5.3.2.2 Xylene or toluene — Saturate the xylene or toluene by shaking 
with a small quantity of water, and distil. Use the distillate for the deter- 
mination of moisture. 

533 Procedure — Clean the entire apparatus with potassium dichromate- 
lulphuric acid cleaning solution to minimize the adherence of water 
droplets to the sides of the condenser and the receiver. Rinse thoroughly 
with water and dry completely before using. The quantity of material 
taken for the test is determined by the amount of moisture present (w/w), 
as indicated below: 

Moisture Range Quantity of Material 

{Approximately ) 
Less than 1 percent 200 g 

1 to 5 percent 100 g 

Moisture in excess of Proportionally smaller 

S percent quantity 

Place the specified quantity ofmaterial-, accurately weighed, in the dis- 
tillatiou flask, add an equal volume of xylene or toluene, as desired, or at 
least 100 ml if less than 100 g of rhe material is used, and swirl to mix. 
Assemble the apparatus and fill the receiver with the solvent by pouring it 
through the condenser until it begins to overflow into the distillation flask. 
Insert a loose cotton plug in the top of the condenser to prevent condensa- 
tion of atmospheric moisture within the tube. In order that the rcfiuxing 
may be under control, wrap the flask and the tube leading to the receiver 
with asbestos cloth. Heat the flask so that the distillation rate is about 
100 drops per minute. When the greater part of the water has distilled 

27 



IS t 548 ( Part I )-1964 

over, increase the distillation rate to about 200 drops per minute and 
continue until no more water is collected. Purge the reflux condenser 
occasionally during the distillation with 5 ml portions of xylene or toluene 
to wash down any moisture adhering to the walls of the condenser. The 
water in the receiver may be made to separate from the xylene or toluene 
by moving the spiral copper wire up and down in the condenser and 
receiver occasionally, thus causing the water to settle at the bottom of the 
receiver. Reflux until the water-level in the receiver remains unchanged 
for 30 minutes and then shut off the source of heat. Flush the condenser 
with either xylene or toluene, as required, making use of the spiral copper 
wire to discharge any moisture droplets. Immerse the receiver in water at 
about 27°C for at least 15 minutes or until the xylene or toluene layer is 
clear, and then read the volume of water. 

5.3.4 Calculation 

100 VD 



Moisture content, percent by weight 



W 



where 



V « volume in ml of water, 

D =• specific gravity of water at. the temperature at which the 

volume of water is read, and 
W ** weight in g of the material taken for the test. 

6. DETERMINATION OF INSOLUBLE IMPURITIES 

6.0 General — The material is dissolved in hot kcrosine and filtered. The 
residue is washed thoroughly with petroleum ether dried at 100 ± 2°C 
and cooled in a desiccator till constant in weight. 

6.1 Apparatus 

6.1.1 Gooch Crucible — prepared with a pad of acid-washed asbestos, 
about 2 mm thick. Wash the pad with water alcohol and ether. Dry to 
constant weight at 100 ± 2°C, cool in a desiccator to room temperature 
and weigh. 

6.1.2 Filter Flask — of convenient size. 

6.1.3 Gooch Cruciblt Adapter 

6.2 Reagenta 

6.2.1 Kerosint — conforming to Grade 1 of *IS : 1459-1959 Specification 
for Kerosines. Filter the kerosine through a Gooch crucible prior to use. 

6.2.2 Petroleum Ether — conforming to solvent Grade 60/80 of MS : 1745- 
1961 Specification for.Petroleum Hydrocarbon Solvents. 

• Since reviled. 

28 



IS: 548 (Part I)-1964 

6 J Procedure — Use the whole of the heated oil or Tat left over after the 
determination of moisture and volatile matter described under 5.1 or 5.2. 
Alternatively, use a sample prepared in the same manner. Add 50 ml of 
kerosine to this quantity of the oil or fat and heat on a water-bath to 
dissolve it. Filter through the prepared Gooch crucible with the aid of 
vacuum. Wash the container and the crucible with five 10-ml portions of 
hot kerosine allowing each portion to drain before adding the next. Wash 
the crucible thoroughly with petroleum ether to remove all the kerosine. 
Dry the crucible and contents to constant weight at 100 ± 2"C, cool to 
room temperature in a desiccator, and weigh. 



6.4 Calculation 



Insoluble impurities, percent 
by weight 



where 

w — gain in weight in g of Gooch crucible, and 
\V a weight in g of the original material taken for the test 
( see 5.1.3 and 5.2.3 ). 

7. DETERMINATION OF ACID VALUE AND FREE FATTY ACIDS 

7.0 General — The acid value is determined by directly titrating the 
material in an alcoholic medium with aqueous sodium or potassium hydro- 
xide solution. Free fatty acid is calculated as oleic, lauric, ricinoleic or 

palmitic acids. 

7.1 Reagents 

7.1.1 Ethyl Alcohol — ninety-five percent ( by volume ), or rectified spirit 
[conforming to IS: 323-1959 Specification for Rectified Spirit ( Revised) ] 
neutral to phenolphthalein indicator. 

7.1.2 Phenolphthalein Indicator Solution — Dissolve one gram of phenol- 
phthalein in 100 ml of ethyl alcohol. 

Note — When testing oili or f»ti which give dark coloured soap solution, the 
observation of the end point a& the titration may be facilitated either (a) by using 
thymolphthalein or alkali blue 6B in place of phenolphthalein, or (b) by adding 
one millilitre of a 0*1 percent ( w/v ) solution of methylene blue in water to each 100 ml 
of phenolphthalein indicator solution before the titration. 

7.1.3 Standard Aqueous Potassium Hydroxide or Sodium Hydroxide Solutions — 
01 Nor 0-5 N. 

7.2 Procedure — Mix the oil or melted fat thoroughly before weighing. 
Weigh accurately a suitable quantity of the cooled oil or fat in a 

29 



IS 1 548 (Part I )-1964 

200-ml conical flask. The weight of the oil or fat taken for the test and the 
strength of the alkali used for the titration shall be such that the volume of 
alkali requited for the titration does not exceed 10 ml. Add 50 to 
100 ml of freshly neutralized hot ethyl alcohol, anrJ about one millilitre 
of phenolphthalein indicator solution. Boil the mixture for about give 
minutes and titrate while as hot as possible with standard aqueous alkali 
solution, shaking vigorously during titration. 

7.3 Calculation 

. ., , 56-1 VN 

Acid value = — — 

W 

where 

V = volume in ml of standard potassium hydroxide or sodium 
hydroxide solution used, 

N — normality of standard potassium hydroxide or sodium 
hydroxide solution, and 

W = weight in g of the material taken for the test. 

7.3.1 Free Fatly Acids — The acidity is frequently expressed as the percen- 
tage of free fatty acids present in the sample. The percentage of free fatty 
acids in most of the oils and fats is calculated on the basis of oleic acid; 
although in coconut oil and palm kernel oil it is often calculated in terms 
of lauric acid, in castor oil in terms of ricinoleir acid, and in palm oil in 
terms of palmitic acid. The calculations in terms of different fatty acids 
are as follows: 

a) Free fatty acids, in terms of oleic acid, 28-2 VN 
percent by weight = — ^ — 

b) Free fatty acids, in terms of lauric acid, 20-0 VN 
percent by weight ■» - — rp — 

c) Free fatty acids, in terms of ricinoleic 29 - 8- VN 
acid, percent by weight *= — »p — 

d) Free fatty acids, in terms of palmitic 25-6 VN 
acid, percent by weight ■■ — w - 



where 



V ass volume in ml of standard potassium hydroxide solution 
used, 

N mm normality of standard potassium hydroxide solution, and 

W « weight in g of the material taken for the test. 

SO 



IS : 548 ( Part I V1964 
8. DETERMINATION OF UNSAPONIFIAILE MATTER 

8.0 General — • The material is completely saponified with alcoholic potas- 
sium hydroxide solution and extracted with petroleum ether. The 
petroleum ether extract is washed with aqueous alcohol and then again 
with water. The washed ether extract is evaporated and the residue 
weighed. Unsaponifiable matter is this residue minus the fatty acid present 
in it, which is determined by titration with sodium hydroxide solution in 
alcoholic medium. 

8.1 Apparatus 

8.1.1 Flat-Bottomed or Conical Flask — 250 to 300 ml capacity. An ordi- 
nary round, fiat-bottomed flask, fitted with a long glass tube which acts as 
a condenser, may also be used. 

8.1.2 Separating Funnels — 500-ml capacity. 

8.2 Reagents 

8.2.1 Alcoholic Potassium Hydroxide Solution — Dissolve 70 to 80 g of potas- 
sium hydroxide in an equal quantity of distilled water, and add sufficient 
aldehyde-free ethyl alcohol ( 95 percent by volume ) or aldehyde-free 
rectified spirit [conforming to IS: 323-1959 Specification for Rectified 
Spirit ( Revised) ], prepared as described under G-3.4 of IS : 323-1959, to 
make up to 1 000 ml. Allow to stand overnight, decant the clear liquid 
and keep in a bottle closed tightly with a cork or rubber stopper. 

8.2.2 Ethyl Alcohol — ninety-five percent ( by volume ), or rectified spirit 
[ conforming to IS : 323-1959 Specification for Rectified Spirit ( Revised ) ]. 

8.2.3 Phenolphthalein Indicator Solution — Dissolve one gram of phenol- 
phthalein in 100 ml of ethyl alcohol. 

8.2.4 Petroleum Ether — conforming to solvent Grade 60/80 of *IS : 1745- 
1961 Specification for Petroleum Hydrocarbon Solvents. 

8.2.5 Aqueous Alcohol — containing 10 percent (by volume) of ethyl 
alcohol [ conforming to *IS : 321-1952 Specification for Ethyl Alcohol 
( Absolute Alcohol ) ]. 

8.2.6 Standard Sodium Hydroxide Solution — approximately 0*02 N. 

8.2.7 Acetone — free from evaporation residue (see*lS: 170-1950 Speci- 
fication for Acetone ). 

8.3 Procedure 

8.3.1 Weigh accurately about 5 g of the ^ell-mixed sample into the flask. 
Add 50 ml of alcoholic potassium hydroxide solution. Boil gently but 
steadily under a reflux condenser for one hour or until the saponification is 

'Since revised. 

31 



ISi548(Partl>1964 

complete. Wash the condenser with about 10 ml of ethyl alcohol. Cool 
the mixture and transfer it to a separating funnel. Complete the transfer 
by washing the flask first with some ethyl alcohol and then with cold water. 
Altogether, add 50 ml of water to the separating funnel followed by an 
addition of 50 ml of petroleum ether. Insert the stopper and shake 
vigorously for at least one minute and allow to settle until both the layers 
are clear. Transfer the lower layer containing the soap solution to another 
separating funnel, and repeat the ether extraction at least six times more 
using 50 ml of petroleum ether for each extraction. If any emulsion is 
formed, add a small quantity of ethyl alcohol or alcoholic potassium 
hydroxide solution. 

8.3.2 Collect all the ether extracts in a separating funnel. Wash the 
combined extracts in the funnel three times with 25-ml portions of aqueous 
alcohol shaking vigorously and drawing off the alcohol-water layer after 
each washing. Again wash the ether layer successively with 20-ml portions 
of water until the wash-water no longer turns pink on addition of a few 
drops of phenolphthalein indicator solution. Do not remove any of the 
ether layers. Transfer the ether layer to a tared flask containing a few 
pieces of pumice stone, and evaporate to dryness on a water-bath under a 
gentle stream of clean dry air. To remove the last traces of ether, place 
the flask in an air-oven at 80 to 90°C for about one hour. To remove the 
last traces of moisture, add a few millilitres of acetone and pass a gentle 
stream of clean dry air over the surface of the material or evacuate using a 
-vater vacuum pump at about 50"C for about 15 minutes. Cool in a 
desiccator and weigh. Repeat the evacuating, cooling and weighing until 
a constant weight is obtained. 

8.3 3 After weighing, take up the residue in 50 ml of warm neutral 
ethyl alcohol, containing a few drops of phenolphthalein indicator solution 
and titrate with standard sodium hydroxide solution. 

8.4 Calculation 

8.4.1 Weight in g of the fatty acids in 

the extract ( as oleic acid ) «- B « 0282 VN 
where 

V » volume in ml of standard sodium hydroxide solution, and 
N *- normality of standard sodium hydroxide solution. 

..,„ .... . . . ^ 100 ( A — B) 

8.4 .2 Unsaponmable matter, percent by weight •» ±-jn - 

where 

A == weight in g of the residue ( set 8.3.2 ), 

B mm weight in g of the fatty acids in the extract ( stt 8.4.1 ), 

and 
W — weight in g of the material taken for the test. 

32 



IS t 548 ( Part I )-1964 

9. DETERMINATION OF MELTING POINT 

9.0 General — Oils and fats are chiefly mixtures of glycerides. They do 
not exhibit either a definite or a sharp melting point. Therefore, the term 
' melting point * does not imply the same characteristics that it does with 
pure crystalline substances. Fats pass through a stage of gradual softening 
before they become completely liquid. The melting point is, therefore, 
denned by the specific conditions of the method by which it is determined 
(m< 2.6). 

9.0.1 The melting point is determined by taking the solid fat inside a 
small capillary tube and two methods are prescribed for the purpose. Both 
of these are applicable to all types of normal animal and vegetable fats and 
the method used shall be specified while stating the results. 

9.1 Open-Tube Capillary-Slip Method 

9.1.1 Apparatus 

9.1.1.1 Melting point tubes — thin walled, uniformly bored capillary 
glass tubes open at both ends and with the following dimensions: 

a) Length, 50 to 60 mm; 

b) Inside diameter 08 to 1*1 mm; and 

c) Outside diameter, T2 to 1*5 mm. 

9.1.1.2 Thermometer — with - 2° subdivisions and a suitable range. 
The thermometer should be checked against a standard thermometer which 
has been calibrated and certified by the National Physical Laboratory, 
New Delhi, or any other laboratory recognized for such work. 

9.1.1.3 Beaker — with a side-tube heating arrangement. Thiele 
melting point tube may be used. 

9.1.1.4 Heat source -gas burner or a spirit lamp. 

9.1.2 Procedure — Melt the sample and filter it through a filter paper to 
remove any impurities and the last traces of moisture. Make sure that the 
sample is absolutely dry. Mix the sample thoroughly. Insert a clean 
melting point tube into the molten sample product so that a column of the 
material, about 10 mm long, is forced info the tube. Chill the sample in 
the tube at once by placing the end of the tube containing the sample 
against a piece of the ice until the fat has solidified. Place the melting 
point tube in a test-tube and hold it for one hour either in a refrigerator or 
in water maintained at 4 to 10'C. Remove thr melting point tube and 
attach with a rubber band or any other suitable means to the thermometer 
so that the lower end of the melting point tube is even with the bottom of 
the bulb of the thermometer. Pour water at about 10*C into the beaker 
or the Thiele tube, and suspend the thermometer in the centre of the 
apparatus, so that the lower end of the sample column is about 30 mm - 

33 



IS t 548 (Part I )-1964 

below the surface of water. Heat the side tube of the apparatus gently, so 
that the temperature of the water rises slowly at the rate of 2°C per minute 
till the temperature reaches 25°C, and thereafter at the rate of 0"5*C per 
minute. Note the temperature of the water when the sample column 
commences to rise in the melting point tube. Report the average of two 
such separate determinations as the melting point, provided that the read- 
ings do not differ by more than 0'5°G. 

9.2 Closed-Tube Complete-Fusion Method 
9.2.1 Apparatus 

9.2.1.1 Melting point tubts — thin-walled, uniformly bored capillary 
glass tubes open at both ends and with the following dimensions: 

a) Length, 50 to 60 mm; 

b) Inside diameter, 0*8 to 1*1 mm; and 

c) Outside diameter, 1 -2 to 1 '5 mm. 

9.2.1.2 Thermometer — with 0*2° subdivisions and a suitable range. 
The thermometer should be checked against a standard thermometer 
which has been calibrated and certified by the National Physical Laboratory, 
New Delhi, oc any other laboratory recognized for such work. 

9.2.1.3 Large test-tube 

9.2.1.4 Glass beaker— 600 ml capacity. 

9.2.1.5 Heat source — gas burner or electric hot-plate with rheostat 
control. 

9.2 3. Procedure — Melt the sample and filter it through a filter paper 
to remove any impurities and the last traces of moisture. Make sure that 
the sample is absolutely dry. Mix the sample thoroughly. Insert a clean 
melting point tube into the molten product so that a column of the mate- 
rial about 10 mm long is forced into the tube. Cautiously fuse one end of 
the tube ( where the sample is located ) in a small flame, taking care not 
to burn the fat. Place the tube in a beaker and while the fat is still in the 
liquid state, transfer to a refrigerator and hold at 4 -to 10°C overnight 
(about 16 hours). Remove the tube from the refrigerator, and attach 
with a rubber band or by any other suitable means to the thermometer so 
that the lower end of the melting point tube is even with the bottom of the 
bulb of the thermometer. Suspend the thermometer in a large test-tube 
containing water and immerse it in the 600-ml beaker which is about half 
full of water. The bottom of the thermometer b immersed in the water 
about 30 mm below the surface. Adjust the starting bath temperature 
from 8 to 10*C below the melting point of the sample at the beginning of 
the test. Agitate the water in the large test-tube as well as in the beaker 
with a small stream of air or by other means, and apply heat so as to 
increase the bath temperature at the rate of about 0'5*C per minute. As 

34 



IS > 548 l Part I )-1964 

fats usually pass through an opalescent stage before melting completely, the 
heating is continued until the liquid in the tube is completely clear 
throughout. Observe the temperature at which the liquid becomes clear. 
Report the average of two such separate determinations as the melting 
point, provided that the readings do not differ by more than 0'5°C. 

10. DETERMINATION OF REFRACTIVE INDEX 

10.1 Apparatus 

10.1.1 Refractometer — Abbe or Butyro refractometer. The temperature 
of the refractometer should be controlled to within ±0'1°C and for this 
purpose it should be provided with a thermostatically controlled water-bath 
and a motor-driven pump to circulate water through the instrument. The 
instrument should be standardized, following the manufacturer's instruc- 
tions, with a liquid of known purity and refractive index or with a glass 
prism of known refractive index. Distilled water, which has a refractive 
index of 1-333 at 20'0°C, is a satisfactory liquid for standardization. 

10.1.2 Light Source — If the refractometer is equipped with a compensa- 
tor, a tungsten lamp or a daylight bulb may be used. Otherwise, a 
monochromatic light, such as an electric sodium vapour lamp, should be 
used. 

10.2 Procedure — Melt the sample, if it is not already liquid, and filter 
through a filter paper to remove any impurities and the last traces of mois- 
ture. Make sure that the sample is completely dry. Adjust the temperature 
of the refractometer to 40'0 ± 01°C or to any other desired temperature. 
Ensure that the prisms are clean and completely dry, and then place a few 
drops of the sample on the lower prism. Close the prisms, tighten firmly 
with the screw-head, and allow to stand for one or two minutes. Adjust 
the instrument and light to obtain the most distinct reading possible, and 
determine the refractive index. 

10.3 Temperature Corrections) — Unless the correction factors are 
specified in the detailed specification, approximate corrections shall be 
made using the following equation: 

R =* R' + K ( T - T) 

where 

R = the reading of the refractometer reduced to the specified 

temperature, 7" C; 
R' = the reading at 7*'°C; 
K = constant, 0000 365 for fats, and 0000 385 for oils ( if 

Abbe refractometer is use.d ), or 
» 0'55 for fats and 0-58 for oils ( if Butyro refractometer is 

used ) ; and 
T' or the temperature at which the reading R' is taken; 
T ■» the specified temperature ( generally 40'0°C ). 

35 



IS : 548 ( Part I )-1961 

10.4 Conversion of Bntyro Refractometer Reading! to Refractive 
Indices — When Butyro refractometer is used, its readings shall be con- 
verted into refractive indices (») c ) using Table 2. 



TABLE 2 CONVERSION OF BUTYRO REFRACTOMETER READINGS 
( B ) TO REFRACTIVE INDICES ( t, d ) 

J Id B 1b B Id B Id B Id 



00 


1-422 


4-7 


8 


9-5 


6 


14-4 


4 


19-3 


2 


0-1 


1 


4-8 


9 


9-6 


7 


14-5 


5 


19-5 


3 


02 


2 


50 


1-426 


9-8 


8 


14-6 


6 


19-6 


4 


04 


3 


51 


1 


9*9 


9 


14-7 


7 


19-7 


5 


05 


4 


52 


2 


100 


1-4300 


14-9 


8 


19-8 


6 


06 


5 


5-4 


3 


10- i 


1 


150 


9 


200 


7 


0-7 


6 


5-5 


4 


10 3 


2 


151 


1-434 


201 


8 


09 


7 


5-6 


5 


10-4 


3 


15-3 


1 


20-3 


9 


1-0 


8 


5-7 


6 


10-5 


4 


15-4 


2 


20-4 


1-438 


11 


9 


5-9 


7 


10-6 


5 


15-5 


3 


20-5 


1 


1-2 


1-423 


60 


8 


10-7 


6 


15-6 


4 


20-6 


2 


1-4 


1 


61 


9 


10-9 


7 


158 


5 


20-8 


3 


1-5 


2 


62 


1-427 


11-0 


8 


15-9 


6 


20-9 


4 


1-6 


3 


6-4 


1 


11-1 


9 


16-0 


7 


21-1 


5 


1-7 


4 


65 


2 


1 1-3 


1-431 


16-2 


8 


21-2 


6 


1-9 


5 


6-6 


3 


11-4 


1 


16-3 


9 


21-3 


7 


20 


6- 


6-8 


4 


11-5 


2 


16-4 


1-435 


214 


8 


21 


7 


69 


5 


tl-6 


3 


16-6 


1 


21-6 


9 


22 


8 


70 


6 


118 


4 


16.7 


2 


21-7 


1-439 


2-4 


9 


71 


7 


11-9 


5 


16-8 


3 


218 


1 


25 


1-424 


7-2 


8 


120 


6 


170 


4 


220 


2 


26 


1 


7-4 


9 


12-2 


7 


171 


5 


221 


3 


2-7 


2 


7-5 


1-42BO 


12-3 


8 


17-2 


6 


222 


4 


2-8 


3 


76 


1 


124 


9 


17-4 


7 


22-4 


5 


30 


4 


7-7 


2 


12-5 


1-432 


17-5 


8 


22-5 


6 


3.1 


5 


7-9 


3 


12-7 


1 


17-6 


9 


226 


7 


32 


6 


80 


4 


12-8 


2 


17-8 


1-436 


22-7 


8 


3-3 


7 


81 


5 


12-9 


3 


17-9 


1 


22-9 


9 


35 


8 


8-2 


6 


130 


4 


180 


2 


230 


1-4400 


36 


9 


8-4 


7 


13-2 


5 


18 2 


'3 


23-2 


1 


37 


1 425 


8-5 


8 


13-3 


6 


18-3 


4 


23-3 


2 


38 


1 


8-6 


9 


13-5 


7 


18-4 


5 


23-4 


3 


40 


2 


87 


1-4290 


13-6 


8 


18-5 


6 


23-5 


4 


41 


3 


8-9 


1 


13-7 


9 


18-7 


7 


23-7 


5 


42 


4 


90 


2 


13-8 


1-4330 


18-8 


8 


23-8 


6 


43 


5 


91 


3 


140 


1 


18-9 


9 


23-9 


7 


45 


6 


9-2 


4 


141 


2 


191 


1-437 


241 


8 


46 


7 


9-4 


5 


14-2 


3 


19-2 


1 


24-2 


9 


















(Ctntmutd) 



36 



IS t 548 ( Part I >-1964 



TABU 2 CONVERSION OF BUTTRO K0KACTOMBTEK READINGS 
( B ) TO RETRACTIVE INDICES ( n D ) - OmU 

B -Id B lj» B 1r> B no B tjo 



24-3 


1-4410 


30-8 


8 


37-5 


6 


44-3 


4 


51-3 


2 


245 


1 


30-9 


9 


37-7 


7 


44-4 


5 


51-4 


3 


246 


2 


310 


1-446 


37-8 


8 


44-6 


6 


31-6 


4 


247 


3 


31-.1 


1 


37-9 


9 


44-7 


7 


51-7 


5 


24-8 


4 


31-4 


2 


381 


1-451 


44-9 


8 


51-9 


6 


250 


5 


315 


3 


38-2 


1 


450 


9 


520 


7 


251 


6 


31-6 


4 


38-3 


2 


452 


1-456 


52-2 


8 


25-2 


7 


318 


5 


38-5 


3 


453 


1 


523 


9 


25-4 


8 


31-9 


6 


38-6 


4 


45-5 


2 


525 


1-4610 


25-5 


9 


321 


7 


38-7 


5 


456 


3 


527 


1 


25-6 


1-442 


32-2 


8 


38-9 


6 


45-7 


4 


52-« 
530 


2 


25-8 


1 


32-3 


9 


390 


7 


45-9 


5 


3 


25-9 


2 


32-5 


1-447 


39-2 


8 


460 


6 


531 


4 


261 


3 


32-6 


1 


393 


9 


46-2 


7 


53-3 


3 


262 


4 


32-8 


2 


39-5 


1-452 


46-3 


8 


53-4 


6 


26-3 


5 


32-9 


3 


39-6 


1 


46-4 


9 


53-6 


7 


26-5 


6 


330 


4 


39-7 


2 


46-6 


1-457 


53-7 


8 


26-6 


7 


33-2 


5 


39-9 


3 


46-7 


1 


53-9 


9 


26-7 


8 


33-3 


6 


400 


4 


46-9 


2 


540 


1-462 


26-9 


9 


33-5 


7 


401 


5 


470 


3 


54-2 


1 


270 


1-443 


33-6 


8 


40-3 


6 


47-2 


4 


54-3 


2 


271 


1 


33-7 


9 


40-4 


7 


47-3 


5 


54-5 


3 


27S 


2 


33-9 


1-4480 


40-6 


8 


47-5 


6 


54-6 


4 


27-4 


3 


340 


1 


40-7 


9 


476 


7 


54-8 


5 


27-5 


4 


34-2 


2 


40-9 


1-453 


47-7 


8 


55-0 


6 


27-7 


5 


34-3 


3 


410 


I 


47-9 


9 


551 


7 


27-8 


6 


34-4 


4 


411 


2 


480 


1-458 


55-3 


8 


279 


7 


346 


5 


41-3 


3 


48-2 


I 


55-4 


9 


28 1 


8 


34-7 


6 


41-4 


4 


483 


2 


55-6 


1-4630 


28-2 


9 


349 


7 


41-5 


5 


48-5 


3 


55-7 


1 


28-3 


1-444 


350 


8 


41-7 


6 


48-6 


4 


55-9 


2 


28-5 


1 


351 


9 


41-8 


7 


488 


5 


56-0 


3 


28-6 


2 


35-3 


1'4490 


420 


8 


48-9 


6 


56-2 


4 


28-7 


3 


35-5 


I 


421 


9 


491 


7 


56-3 


5 


28-9 


4 


35-6 


2 


42-3 


1-454 


492 


8 


56-5 


6 


290 


5 


357 


3 


42-4 


1 


494 


9 


56-6 


7 


29-2 


6 


35-8 


4 


42-5 


2 


49-5 


1-459 


56-8 


8 


29-3 


7 


360 


5 


42-7 


3 


497 


I 


569 


9 


29-4 


8 


361 


6 


42-8 


4 


498 


2 


571 


1-4640 


29-6 


9 


363 


7 


430 


5 


500 


3 


57-3 


1 


29-7 


1-4450 


36-4 


8 


431 


6 


501 


4 


57-4 


2 


29-9 


1 


36-5 


9 


43-3 


7 


502 


5 


57-6 


3 


30-0 


2 


36-7 


1-4500 


43-4 


8 


50-4 


6 


57-7 


4 


301 


3 


36-8 


1 


43-6 


9 


50-5 


7 


57-9 


5 


30-3 


4 


370 


2 


43-7 


1«5 


50-7 


8 


580 


6 


304 


5 


371 


3 


43-9 


1 


50-8 


9 


58-2 


7 


30-6 


6 


37-2 


4 


440 


2 


510 


1-460 


58-3 


8 


30-7 


7 


37-4 


5 


44-2 


3 


511 


1 


58-5 


9 


















(Ctttinmd) 



37 



IS » 548 ( Part I)-1964 



TABLE 2 CONVERSION OF BXJTYRO REFRACTOMETER READINGS 
( B ) TO REFRACTIVE INDICES ( i) fl ) — Conld 



B 


*/> 


B 


% 


B 


"j> 


B 


"/> 


B 


Id 


586 


1465 


66-2 


9 


740 


8 


82-4 


7 


911 


6 


58-8 


1 


66-4 


1470 


74-1 


9 


82-5 


8 


91-2 


7 


58-9 


2 


66-5 


1 


74-3 


1-475 


82-7 


9 


91-4 


8 


591 


3 


66-7 


2 


74-5 


1 


829 


1-480 


91-6 


9 


592 


4 


66-8 


3 


746 


2 


83 I 


1 


91-8 


1-485 


59-4 


5 


670 


4 


748 


3 


83-2 


2 


920 


1 


59-5 


6 


67-2 


5 


750 


4 


83-4 


3 


921 


2 


59-7 


7 


67*3 


6 


75-1 


5 


83-6 


4 


923 


3 


59-8 


8 


67-5 


7 


75-3 


6 


83-8 


5 


92-5 


4 


60-0 


9 


67-7 


8 


75-5 


7 


83-9 


6 


92-7 


5 


60'2 


1-466 


67-8 


9 


75-6 


8 


841 


7 


92-9 


6 


603 


1 


680 


1-471 


75-8 


9 


84-3 


6 


.930 


7 


605 


2 


68-1 


1 


760 


1-476 


845 


9 


93-2 


8 


60-6 


3 


68-3 


2 


761 


1 


846 


1-4810 


93-4 


9 


60-8 


4 


68-4 


3 


76-3 


2 


84-8 


1 


93-6 


1-486 


60-9 


5 


68-6 


4 


765 


3 


850 


2 


93-8 


1 


61-1 


6 


68-7 


5 


76-7 


4 


85-2 


i 


940 


2 


61-2 


7 


68-9 


6 


76-8 


5 


85-3 


4 


941 


3 


61-4 


8 


691 


7 


77-0 


6 


85-5 


5 


94-3 


4 


61-5 


9 


69-2 


8 


77-2 


7 


85-7 


6 


94-5 


5 


61-7 


1-467 


694 


9 


77-3 


8 


859 


7 


94-7 


6 


61-8 


1 


69-5 


1-472 


775 


9 


860 


8 


94-8 


7 


620 


2 


69-7 


1 


77-7 


1-477 


86-2 


9 


950 


8 


622 


3 


69-9 


2. 


779 


1 


86-4 


1-482 


95-2 


9 


62-4 


4 


70-0 


3 


781 


2 


86-6 


1 


954 


1-4S7 


625 


5 


70-2 


4 


78-2 


3 


86-7 


2 


95-6 


1 


62-6 


6 


70-3 


5 


78-4 


4 


86-9 


3 


95-8 


2 


62-8 


7 


70-5 


6 


78-6 


5 


871 


4 


960 


3 


62-9 


8 


'0-7 


7 


78-7 


C 


87-3 


5 


961 


4 


631 


9 


70-8 


8 


78-9 


7 


87-5 


6 


96-3 


5 


63-2 


1-468 


710 


9 


79-1 


8 


87-6 


7 


96-5 


6 


63-4 


I 


711 


1-473 


79-2 


9 


87-8 


8 


96-7 


7 


63-5 


2 


71-3 


1 


79-4 


1-478 


880 


9 


96-9 


3 


63-7 


3 


71-4 


2 


796 


1 


882 


1-483 


97 


9 


63-8 


4 


71-6 


3 


79-8 


2 


88-3 


1 


97-2 


1-4MV 3 


640 


5 


71-8 


4 


800 


3 


88-5 


2 


97-4 


1 


64-2 


6 


71-9 


5 


80-1 


4 


88-7 


3 


97-6. 


2 


64-3 


7 


721 


6 


80-3 


5 


88-9 


4 


97-8 


3 


64-5 


8 


72-2 


7 


80-5 


6 


891 


5 


980 


4 


64-7 


9 


72-4 


8 


80-6 


7 


89-2 


6 


98-1 


5 


64-8 


1-4690 


725 


9 


80-8 


8 


89-4 


7 


98-3 


6 


650 


1 


72-7 


1-474 


810 


9 


89-6 


a 


98-5 


~ 


651 


2 


72-9 


1 


81-2 


1-4790 


89-8 


9 


98-7 


8 


65-3 


3 


730 


2 


81-3 


1 


90-0 


1-484 


98-9 


9 


65-4 


4 


73-2 


3 


81-5 


2 


90-2 


1 


99-1 


1-4890 


65-6 


5 


733 


4 


81-7 


3 


90-3 


2 


99-2 


1 


65-7 


6 


73-5 


5 


81-9 


4 


90-5 


3 


99-4 


2 


65-9 


7 


73-7 


6 


820 


5 


90-7 


4 


99-6 


3 


661 


8 


73-8 


7 


82-2 


6 


90-9 


3 


99-8 
1000 


4 
1.4895 



38 



IS i 548 (Part 1}-1964 
11. DETERMINATION OF SPECIFIC GRAVITY 

11.0 General — The specific gravity may be determined with a Westphal 
hydrostatic balance, or with a specific gravity bottle or pyknometcr. The 
latter method shall be adopted as the referee method in cases of dispute. 
The temperatures at which the specific gravity is determined shall be 
reported, namely, sp gr 30°C/30°C or sp gr 95 C C/30°C. 

11.1 Preparation of the Material — Melt the sample, if necessary, and 
filter through a filter paper to remove any impurities and the last traces of 
moisture, n\ake sure that the sample is completely dry. Cool the sample 
to 30°C or warm to the desired test temperature. 

11.2 Westphal Hydrostatic Balance Method — Suspend the plummet 
in the cylinder filled with recently boiled distilled water at the test tem- 
perature, and place the largest rider on the hook. Adjust the screw on 
the base until the pointer is exactly opposite the fixed indicator point. 
Wipe the plummet and the cylinder to remove the water. Fill the cylinder 
with the material at the same temperature and dip the plummet into the 
material, removing air bubbles, if any, formed in the eyehole of the 
plummet, by lifting it from the material. Re-immerse the plummet in the 
material and adjust the height of the balance to ensure that the plummet 
will be nearly in the middle of the material when the beam is counter- 
poised. Place riders on the beam, till the pointer and the fixed indicator 
are exactly opposite each other Read the specific gravity from the posi- 
tion of the riders on the beam, beginning with the largest and ending with 
the smallest. 

11.2.1 Corrections — Sometimes, especially when using the hydrostatic 
balance, it is not convenient to make the determination at the specified 
temperature. The determination may be made at a convenient temperature 
(T') as near to the specified temperature (T) as possible and the result cor- 
rected as shown below to the specified temperature. This correction is based 
on the average value for the coefficient of expansion of oils and fata 
(0000 64 per 1°C) and for water (0000 23 per 1°C). Approximate 
temperature corrections may, therefore, be made as follows: 

a) Specific gravity at r-C/J-C - ff+ ™g!» ( ( £ I \ \ 

where 

D' = density of oil fat at T'°C; 

T' -» the temperature at which the densities D' and W were 
determined; 

T = the standard temperature, 30°C; and 

W — density of water at 7'°C 

39 



IS : 548 (Part I )-l 964 

b) Specific gravity at T°C/T 9 C = S' + 0-000 41 (T - T) 

where 

S' —. specinc gravity at 7"/7"' C; 

T — temperature at which the specific gravity was deter- 
mined; and 

7"=» standard temperature, 30°C. 
11.3 Specific Gravity Bottle or Pyknometer Method 

11.3.1 Apparatus 

11.3.1.1 Specific gravity bottle or pyknometer — with weli-fitling ground 
glass joints. To calibrate, clean and dry the bottle or pyknometer 
thoroughly, weigh and then fill with recently boiled and cooled water at 
about 25°C after removing the cap of the side arm. Fill to overflowing 
by holding the bottle or pyknometer on its side in such a manner as to 
prevent the entrapment of air bubbles. Insert the stopper and immerse 
in a water-bath at the desired test temperature ±0-2°G. Keep the 
entire bulb completely covered with water and hold at that temperature 
for 30 minutes. Carefully remove any water which has exuded from the 
capillary opening. Remove from the bath, wipe completely dry, replace 
the cap, cool to room temperature and weigh. Calculate the weight of 
water. This is a constant for the bottle or pyknometer, but should be 
checked periodically. A specific gravity bottle of about 50 ml capacity 
and of either of the two shapes as shown in Fig. 7 is recommended. 

11.3.1.2 Water-bath — maintained at 300 ± 0-2°C, or 950 ± 0'2°C. 
as required. 

11.3.1.3 Thermometer — any convenient thermometer of a suitable 
range, with 0"1 or p 2°C subdivisions. The thermometer should be 
checked against a standard thermometer, which has been calibrated and 
certified by the National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi, or any other 
laboratory recognized for such work. 

11.3.2 Procedure — Fill the bottle with the oil previously cooled to about 
25° C or the melted fat to overflowing, holding the' bottle on its side in 
such a manner as to prevent the entrapment of air bubbles after" removing 
the cap of the side arm. Insert the stopper, immerse in the water-bath 
at 300 ± 0-2°C, or at 950 ± 0-2°C, as required, and hold for 
30 minutes. Carefully wipe off any oil which has come through the capil- 
lary opening. Remove the bottle from the bath, clean and dry it 
thoroughly. Replace the cap of the side arm, coo! to room temperature 
and weigh. 

11. 3 3 Calculation 

a) Specific gravity at 30 o C/30°C = xf~% 

40 



IS:548(PartI)-1964 





Fio. 7 Specific Gravity Bottles 



where 



A «■ weight in g of the specific gravity bottle with oil at 30"C, 

B = weight in g of the specific gravity bottle, and 

C mb weight in g of the specific gravity bottle with water at 
SO^C. 

b) Specific gravity A — B 

at95°C/30»C =- {d _ B) x [ • + ( 00 d0025 x 65 )] 

where 

A «* weight in g of the specific gravity bottle and fat at 95°C, 
B = weight in g of the specific gravity bottle, 

C ■» weight in g of the specific gravity bottle with water 
at 30°C, and 
0*000 025 = coefficient of expansion of glass. 

11.3.4 Comctions — set 11.2.1. 



41 



IS: 548 (Part I)-1964 
12. TITRE TEST 

12.0 General — The fatty oil is saponified with glycerol-caustic potash 
solution, and the soap is acidified with dilute sulphuric acid to give fatty 
acids. The fatty acids obtained are washed and dried. The highest 
temperature recorded during the solidification under standard conditions 
is the titre. 

12.1 Apparatus — The assembly of the apparatus is shown in Fig. 8, and 
the various components are described under 12.1.2 to 12.1.8. 

12.1.1 Saponification Flask— 250 to 300 ml capacity. 

12.1.2 Low-Form Beaker— of 2 litre capacity, to serve as a water-bath. 

12.1.3 Wide-Mouth Bottle — of 450 ml capacity, height 190 mm and 
inside diameter of neck 38 mm. 

12.1.4 Titre Test-Tube — about 100 mm in length, 25 mm in diameter 
and one millimetre wall thickness, with an etched mark extending around 
the lube at a distance of 57 mm from the bottom to show the height to 
which the tube is to be filled. 

12.1.5 Stirrer-- made of glass, stainless steel or monel metal, with 
one end bent in the form of a loop of 19 mm outside diameter. The upper 
end may be formed to suit stirring with hand or attached to a mechanical 
stirrer. 

12.1.6 Laboratory Thermometer — range to 150°C. 

12.1.7 Corks — as shown in Fig. 8. 

12.1.8 Titre Thermometer — with the following characteristics: 

a) Type — etched stem glass. 

b) Liquid — mercury. 

c) Filling above liquid — evacuated or nitrogen gas. 

d) Temperature range — jnninus 2 to 68°C- 

e) Subdivisions — 02°C. 

f) Total length — 385 to 390 mm. 

g) Stem diameter — 6 to 7 mm. 

h) Stem construction — plain or lens front. The cross-section of 
the lens front type shall be such that it will pass through an 
8-mm ring gauge but will not enter a 5-mm slot gauge. 

j) Bulb diameter — from 5*5 mm to not greater than the diameter of 
the stem. 

k) Bulb length — 15 to 25 mm . 

42 



IS 1 548 (Part I)-1964 



._ ^TITRE THERMOMETER 



TO 150 C 
THERMOMETER -?V> ^"\ 




2-LITRE LOW-FORM 
BEAKER 



CORK EQUALLY SPACED 
TO HOLD THE BOTTLE 



INTACT 



WATER-BATH 



SAMPLE 

TiTRE TEST-TUBE 

450 -ml WIDE- MOUTH 

BOTTLE 

LEAD SHOT OR WEIGHT 

FLAT CORK 



Fio. 8 Assembly of Apparatus for Titre Test 

m) Distance from bottom of bulb to minus 2°C mark — 50 to 60 mm. 

n) Distance from 68°C mark to top of thermometer — 20 to 35 mm. 

p) Length of unchanged capillary between the highest graduation mark and the 

expansion chamber — 10 mm. 
q) Expansion chamber — to permit heating to at least 85*C. 
r) Top finish — glass ring, 
s) Longer graduation lines — at each 1°G mark, 
t) Graduations numbered — at zero and at each multiple of 2°C. 



43 



IS : 548 ( Part I )>1964 

u) Immersion — 45 mm. A line shall be etched around the stem, 
45 mm from the bottom of the bulb. 

w) Maximum scale error permitted at any point — 0-2°C. 

y) Standardization — The thermometer shall be standardized at the 
melting point of ice and at intervals of approximately 20*C, for 
the condition of 45 mm immersion and for an average stem tem- 
perature of the emergent mercury column of 25°C. 

12.2 Reagents 

12.2.1 Glycerol-Caustic Potash Solution — Dissolve with the aid of heat, 
250 g of solid potassium hydroxide in 1 250 g of glycerine. Do noc heat 
above 140°C. 

12.2.2 Dilute Sulphuric Acid — 30 percent by weight obtained by 
cautiously adding 16 ml of concentrated sulphuric acid, sp gr 1'84 [con- 
forming to IS: 266-1961 Specification for Sulphuric Acid {Revised)] to 
70 mm of water. 

12.23 Methyl Orange Indicator Solution — Dissolve 0-1 g of methyl orange 
in 100 ml of water. 

12.2.4 Acetone — conforming to *IS : 170-1950 Specification for Acetone. 

12.3 Procedure 

12.3.1 Preparation of Fatty Acids — Weigh about 70 g of the glycerol- 
caustic potash solution into the saponification flask. Heat to 1 50°C while 
stirring. Add about 30 g of the sample of oil or melted fat and re-heat to 
about I50°C. If necessary, add a little more glycerol-caustic potash solu- 
tion to ensure complete saponification. ( Complete saponification is usually 
indicated by an initial change in the appearance of the mass often 
accompanied by an increase in the viscosity or thickening. The solution 
then thins out after the reaction is complete and assumes a homogeneous 
appearance. The most common characteristic is that of soap bubbles form- 
ing and rising from the surface. Considerable care should be exercised at 
all times to ensure complete saponification. ) Cool slightly and dissolve the 
soap in 300 mi of water contained in a 1 000-ml beaker. Add dilute sul- 
phuric acid until the solution is distinctly acidic to methyl orange indicator, 
and place the beaker in a boiling water-bath until the fatty acids collect 
as a clear layer at the top. Siphon off the lower aqueous acid layer, add 
300 ml of hot water, place in the boiling water-bath for a few minutes, and 
again siphon off the aqueous acid layer. Wash the fatty acids thrice in this 
manner or until the last traces of soap and acid are removed. The 
acidification and washing should be done in as short a period as possible, 
keeping the beaker covered to prevent the oxidation of the fatty acids. 
After the last wash, allow the fatty acids to settle for a few minutes and 
then decant them carefully. Filter through one or two thicknesses of filter 

'Sine* revised. 

44 



IS : 548 ( Part I )-1964 

paper introduced into a conical flask, and add about 10 ml of acetone. 
Close the flask with an air-tight cork, carrying a glass tube. Immerse the 
flask in boiling water and apply suction from a water pump until all 
Bubbling ceases. Remove the cork and dry the contents of the flask at 
about 105°C for at least half an hour. 

12.3.2 Determination of Titre — Fill the low-form beaker with water up 
to two-thirds of its capacity. Adjust the temperature of water between 15°C 
and 20°C below the expected titre point when it is not above 35°C, and at 
20 ± 1°C when it is 35°C or higher. Fill the test-tube up to the mark with 
the fatty acid preparation described in 12.3.1, at a temperature 10 to 12°C 
higher than the expected titre point. Insert the titre thermometer in the 
centre of the sample and adjust its height so that its immersion mark coin- 
cides with the top surface of the fatty acid layer. When the temperature of 
the fatty acid comes down to about 10°G higher than the titre point, set 
the stirrer moving in a vertical direction at a rate of about 60 complete up 
and down motions per minute. The temperature of the fatty acid gradually 
comes down and stirring is continued until the temperature remains cons- 
tant for 30 seconds. The stirring is stopped when the temperature begins 
to rise and the stirrer is raised out of the sample. The highest temperature 
recorded by the thermometer during this rise is the titre point. Duplicate 
determinations should agree within 0'2 o C. 

13. DETERMINATION OF COLOUR 

13.0 General — -This method determines the colour of oils by comparison 
with Lovibond glasses of known colour characteristics. The colour is 
expressed as the sum total of the yellow and red slides us^d to match the 
colour of the oil in a cell of the specified size in the Lovibond tintometer. 

13.1 Apparatus 

13.1.1 Lovibond Tintometer or Colorimeter 

13.1.2 Glass Cells — Presently, the Lovibond cell deMi?nations generally 
employed in the laboratories in the country, namely, J in, J in, 1 in and 
5J in are recommended. However, with the corresponding metric desig- 
nations of the cells, such as 1, 2,5 and 10 cm, also becoming available, 
their use will involve reconsideration of the requirements for colour of oils 
and fats. 

13.1.3 Filter Paper 

13.2 Procedure — Melt the sample, if it is not already liquid, and filter 
through a filter paper to remove any impurities and the last traces of 
moisture. Make sure that the sample is absolutely clear and free from 
turbidity. Clean the glass cell of the desired size ( see 13.3.2 ) with carbon 
tetrachloride and allow it to dry. Fill it with .the clear filtered sample and 

45 



IS: 548 (Part 1 )-1964 

place the cell in position in the tintometer. Place along side of it such red, 
yellow, blue or neutral Lovibond glass slides or any combinations of these 
as are necessary to match the colour shade of the oil, observing the colours 
of the oil and of the combination of the glass slides through an eyepiece. 

13.3 Report — Report the colour of the oil in terms of Lovibond units as 
follows: 

Colour reading 
in(*)ce!l --=(«Y-f56R)or(aY+10 6R) 

where 

a = the sum total of the various yellow ( Y ) slides used, and 

b = the sum total of the various red ( R ) slides used. 

13.3.1 Although the yellow and red slides required to match the colour 
shade of an oil in a Lovibond tintometer are assessed separately, it is found 
that to a certain extent these slides arc mutually compensatory. Consequent- 
ly, different workers may report different values for the yellow and red 
units for the same oil, and the same workers may report different values for 
the yellow and red units for the oil examined at different times. To obviate 
such personal errors, a composite factor is to be used for checking the 
colour, comprising the sum total of the yellow ( Y ) units and 5 or 10 times 
the total of the red ( R ) units as specified for the oil or fat; ( Y -f 10 R ) is 
the mode of expressing the colour of moderately dark-coloured oils, such 
as washed cottonseed oil, whereas ( Y -f 5 R ) is the mode of expressing 
the colour of other vegetable oils. 

13.3.2 The dimensions of the cell used and the mode of expressing the 
colour reading for different oils shall be as follows: 

Oil I Fat Size- Designation Mode of Expressing 

of Celt Colour Reading 

(in) 

Castor 1 Y + 5R 

Groundnut 1 Y -f 5R 

Coconut 1 Y + 5R 

Sesame | Y -f 5R 

Mustard \ Y + 5R 

MAHUA J Y + 5R 

Cottonseed ( washed J Y + 10R 

and refined ) 



•Size designation of the cell used 



46 



IS : 548 ( Part I >1964 

14. DETERMINATION OF IODINE VALUE ( WIJS ) 

14.0 General — The material is treated, in carbon tetrachloride medium, 
with a known excess of iodine monochloride solution in glacial acetic acid 
( Wijs solution ). The excess of iodine monochloride is treated with potas- 
sium iodide and the liberated iodine estimated by titration with sodium 
thiosulphate solution. 

14.1 Reagent* 

14.1.1 Potassium Dichromau — conforming to *IS : 250-1953 Specification 
for Potassium Bichromate, Technical and Analytical Reagent. 

14.1.2 Concentrated Hydrochloric Acid — conforming to IS : 265-1962 
Specification for Hydrochloric Acid ( Revised). 

14.1.3 Potassium Iodide Solution — Prepare a fresh solution by dissolving 
10 g of potassium iodide free from potassium iodate, in 90 ml of water. 

14.1.4 Starch Solution — Triturate 5 g of starch and 001 g of mercuric 
iodide with 30 ml of cold water and slowly pour it with stirring into one 
litre of boiling water. Boil for three minutes. Allow to cool and decant off 
the supernatant clear liquid. 

14.1.5 Standard Sodium Thiosulphate Solution — approximately 0*1 N. Dis- 
solve approximately 24*8 g of sodium thiosulphate crystals ( Na^SjOj, 5H t O ) 
in water which has been well boiled to free it from carbon dioxide and 
make up to 1 000 ml. Store the solution in a cool place in a dark- 
coloured stock bottle with a guard-tube filled with soda lime. After storing 
the solution for about two weeks, filter, if necessary, and standardize it as 
prescribed under 14.1.5.1. 

14.1.5.1 Weigh accurately about 50 g of finely ground potassium 
dichromate which has been previously dried to a constant weight at 
105 ± 2°C into a clean one-litre volumetric flask. Dissolve in water, make 
up to the mark; shake thoroughly and keep the solution in a cool dark 
place. For standardization of sodium thiosulphate, pipette 25 ml of this 
solution into a clean glass stoppered 250-ml conical flask or bottle. Add 
5 ml of concentrated hydrochloric acid and 15 ml of a 10-percent potassium 
iodide solution. Allow to stand in the dark for 5 minutes and titrate the 
mixture with the solution of sodium thiosulphate, using starch solution as 
an internal indicator towards the end. The end point is taken when the 
blue colour changes to green. Calculate the normality ( .V ) of the sodium 
thiosulphate solution as follows: 

25 W 
49 03 V 



•Since revised. 

47 



IS i 548 (Part I)-1964 

where 

W ■= weight in g of the potassium dichromate, and 

V = volume in ml of sodium thiosulphate solution required 
fof the titration. 

14.1.6 Iodine Crystals — re-sublimed. 

14.1.7 Acetic Acid — glacial, 99 percent, having a melting point of 
14 , 8°C and free from reducing impurities. Determine the melting point of 
the acetic acid and test it for reducing impurities as follows: 

a) Determination of melting point — Take a 15-cm long test-tube and 
fill it to about two-thirds with the acetic acid. Insert into 
the acid a thermometer satisfying the requirements specified 
under 12.1.8 through a cork stopper fitting the test-tube. The 
amount of acid should be at least double the quantity required 
to cover the bulb of the thermometer when the bottom of the 
latter is 12 mm from the bottom of the test-tube. Suspend this 
tube within a larger test-tube through a cork. Cool the acid by 
immersing the assembly in ice water until the temperature is 
10°C, then withdraw the assembly from the ice water and 
stir the acid rather vigorously for a few moments, thus causing 
the super-cooled liquid to crystallize partially. Take thermometer 
readings every 15 seconds and consider as the true melting 
point, that temperature at which the reading remains constant 
for at least 2 minutes. 

b) Test for reducing impurities ( potassium permanganate t?st ) — Dilute 
2 ml of the acetic acid with 10 ml of water and add 2 drops of 
- l N potassium permanganate solution and maintain at 27±2°C. 
The test shall be taken as having been satisfied if the pink colour 
is not discharged at the end of two hours. 

14.1.8 Chlorine Gas — dry. 

14.1.9 Iodine Trichloride ( ICI, ) 

14.1.10 Iodine Monochloride ( ICI ) — 98 percent chemically pure. 

14.1.11 Wijs Iodine Monochloride Solution — Prepare this solution by one 
of the following three methods, and store in a glass-stoppered bottle in 
a cool place, protected from light: 

a) Dissolve 13 g of iodine in one litre of acetic acid, using gentle 
heat, if necessary, and determine the strength by titration with 
standard sodium thiosulphate solution. Set aside 50 to 100 ml 
of the solution and introduce chlorine gas into the remainder until 
the characteristic colour change occurs and the halogen content 
is nearly doubled as ascertained again by titration. If the 

48 



IS i 548 (Part I>-1964 

halogen content has been more than doubled, reduce it by adding 
the requisite quantity of the iodine-acetic acid solution. A slight 
excess of iodine does no harm, but avoid an excess of chlorine. 

Example: 

If the titration of 20 ml of original iodinc-acctic acid solution 
requires 22 ml of standard sodium thiosulphate, 20 ml of 
the finished Wijs solution should require between 43 and 
44 ml ( and not more than 44 ml ) of the same sodium 
thiosulphate solution. 

b) Dissolve 8 g of iodine trichloride in approximately 450 ml of 
acetic acid. Dissolve separately 9 g of iodine in 450 ml of acetic 
acid, using heat, if necessary. Add gradually the iodine solution 
to the iodine trichloride until the colour has changed to reddish- 
brown. Add 50 ml more of iodine solution and dilute the mixture 
with acetic acid till 10 ml of the mixture is equivalent to 20 ml 
of standard thiosulphate solution when the halogen content is 
estimated by titration in the presence of an excess of potassium 
iodide and water. Heat the solution to 10Q°C for 20 minutes, 
and cool. Prevent access of water vapour in preparing the solution. 

c) Dissolve 10 ml of iodine monochloride in about 1 800 ml of glacial 
acetic acid ( chemically pure ) and shake vigorously. Pipette 5 ml 
of this, add 10 ml of potassium iodide solution and titrate with 
0' 1 N standard sodium thiosulphate solution, using starch solution 
as indicator. Adju«t the volume of the solution till it is approxi- 
mately 0-2 N. 

14.1.12 Carbon Tetrachloride or Chloroform — inert to Wijs solution. 

14.2 Procedure — Melt the sample if it is not already completely liquid, 
and filter through a filter paper to remove any impurities and the last 
traces of moisture. Make sure that the sample as well as the glass 
apparatus used is absolutely clean and dry. Weigh accurately, by 
difference, an appropriate quantity of the oil or fat between the limits 
indicated in col 2 and 3 of Table 3, into a clean dry 500-ml iodine flask or 
well ground glass-stoppered bottle to which 25 ml of carbon tetrachloride 
have been added, and agitate to dissolve the contents. The weight of the 
sample shall be such that there is an excess of 50 to 60 percent of Wijs solu- 
tion over that actually needed. Add 25 ml of the Wijs solution and replace 
the glass stopper after wetting with potassium iodide solution; swirl for 
intimate mixing, and allow to stand in the dark for 30 minutes in the case 
of non-drying and semi-drying oils and one hour in the case of drying oils. 
Carry out a blank test simultaneously under similar experimental condi- 
tions. After standing, add 15 ml of potassium iodide solution and 100 ml 
of water, rinsing in the stopper also, and titrate the liberated iodine with 
standard sodium thiosulphate solution, swirling the contents of the bottle 

49 



IS i 548 (Part I>1964 

continuously to avoid any local excess until the colour of the solution is 
straw yellow. Add one millilitre of the starch solution and continue the 
titration until the blue colour formed disappears after thorough shaking 
with the stopper on. 



TABLE 3 


WEIGHT OF OIL OR FAT FOR DETERMINATION OF 
IODINE VALUE 






{Ctaust 


14.2) 




iodmb value 
Evicted 


Weight 


in g or 

-A. 


Sample 


Weighing Accuracy 


Maximum 




■ 
Minimum 




(I) 


(2) 




(3) 


(4) 


Lea than 3 


10 




10 


* o-ooi 


5 


6-346 




5-077 


*0O00 5 


10 


3-173 




2-538 4 


* 0-000 2 


50 


0-6612 




0-528 8 


* 0000 2 


100 


0-317 3 




0-253 8 


-0 000 1 


150 


0-212 5 




0170 


* O000 1 


200 


0158 6 




0126 9 


-0-000 1 



14 J Calculation 



. .. . 12-69(5-5) jV 

Iodine value = — ... — - - 

W 



where 

B = Volume in ml of standard sodium thiosulphatc solution 
required for the blank, 

S = volume in ml of standard sodium thiosulphatc solution 
required for the sample, 

Jf = normality of the standard sodium thiosulphatc solution, 
and 

W = weight in g of the material taken for the test. 



IS. DETERMINATION OF SAPONIFICATION VALUE 

15.0 General — The material is saponified by rcfluxing with a known 
excess of alcoholic potassium hydroxide solution. The alkali consumed for 
saponification is determined by titrating the excess alkali with standard 
hydrochloric acid. 

50 



IS i 548 ( Part I )-1964 

15.1 Apparatus 

15.1.1 Conical Flasks — 250 to 300 ml capacity. 

15.1 .2 Reflux Condenser — any efficient reflux condenser, at least 65 cm 
long. 

15.1.3 Water-Bath or Electric Hot-Plate with Rheostat Control 

15.2 Reagents 

15.2.1 Alcoholic Potassium Hydroxide Solution— Dissolve 35 to 40 g of 
potassium hydroxide in 20 ml of distilled water, and add sufficient 
aldehyde-free rectified spirit [conforming to IS : 323-1959 Specification 
for Rectified Spirit ( Revised) ] to make up to 1 000 ml. Allow to stand 
overnight, decant the clear liquid and keep in a bottle closed tight with a 
cork or rubber stopper. 

15.2.2 Aldehyde-Free Rectified Spirit — may be prepared according to either 
of the two methods given in 15.2.2.1 and 15.2.2.2. 

15.2.2.1 Method /—Redistil rectified spirit (conforming to IS : 323- 
1959 ) over solid caustic soda or caustic potash, add 2 to 3 g of metapheny- 
lcncdiamine hydrochloride per litre of rectified spirit, digest at ordinary 
temoerature for several days or under a reflux condenser on a steam-bath 
for several hours and distil slowly, rejecting the first 100 ml and the last 
200 ml of the distillate. 

15.2.2.2 Method II — Reflux 1-2 litres of rectified spirit (conforming 
to IS: 323-1959 ) for 30 minutes in a round-bottom flask with 10 g of 
caustic potash and 6 g of granulated aluminium ( or aluminium foil ). 
Distil and collect one litre after discarding the first 50 ml. 

15.23 Phenolphthalein Indicator Solution — Dissolve 1*0 g of phenol- 
phthalein in 100 ml of rectified spirit ( conforming to IS : 323-1959). 

Note — When testing oils or fats which give dark-coloured soap solutions, the 
observation of the end point of the titration may be facilitated either (a) by using 
thymol phthakin, or alkali blue 6B in place of phenolphthalein or (b) by adding one 
millilitre of a 0' I percent ( wjv ) solution of methylene blue in water to each 100 ml of 
phenolphthalein indicator solution before the titration 

15.2.4 Standard Hydrochloric Acid — approximately 0'5 N. 

153 Procedure — Melt the sample, if it is not already liquid, and filter 
through a filter paper to remove any impurities and the last traces of mois- 
ture. Make sure that the sample is completely dry. Mix the sample 
thoroughly, and weigh accurately by difference about 1*5 to 20 g of the 
sample in a conical flask. Add 25 ml of the alcoholic potassium hydroxide 
solution and connect the reflux air condenser to the flask. Heat the flask 
on a water-bath or an electric hot-plate for not more than one hour. Boil 
gently but steadily until the sample is completely saponified as indicated 

51 



IS: 548 (Part I)-1964 

by absence of any oily matter and appearance of clear solution. After the 
flask and condenser have cooled somewhat, wash down the inside of the 
condenser with about 10 ml of hot ethyl alcohol neutral to phenolphthalei**.. 
Add about one millilitrc of phenolphthalein indicator solution, and titrate 
with standard hydrochloric acid. Prepare and conduct a blank determina- 
tion at the same time. 

15.4 Calculation 

Saponification value ■» — rn — ' — 

where 

B — volume in ml of standard hydrochloric acid required for 
the blank, 

5 tm volume in ml of standard hydrochloric acid required for 
the sample, 

N «» normality of the standard hydrochloric acid, and 
W •= weight in g of the material taken for the test. 

16. DETERMINATION OF ACETYL VALUE AND HYDROXYL 
VALUE 

16.0 General — Two methods have been prescribed, namely, Method A 
and Method B. Being simpler, Method B is preferred. 

16.0.1 Method A — A sample of oil or .at is acetylated by refluxing with 
acetic anhydride and the excess anhydride is decomposed with water and 
sodium bicarbonate solution. The saponification value of the washed and 
dried acetylated oil is determined as in 15. 

16.0.2 Method B — The process consists in acetylartng the oil or fat with 
a measured quantity of acetic anhydride in pyridine decomposing the 
excess anhydride by boiling with water and then, after the addition of 
sufficient butyl alcohol to give a homogeneous solution, titrating with 
alcoholic alkali. A control test with the acetic anhydride and pyridine 
without the oil or fat provides a measure of the acetic anhydride available 
for acetylation; a similar test with the oil or fat and the pyridine without 
the acetic anhydride provides a measure of the free fatty acid present. 
From the figures obtained, the acetyl value or the hydroxy! value of the fat 
is calculated. 

16.1 Method A 
16.1.1 Apparatus 

16.1.1 .1 Beaker — 800 ml capacity. 

52 



IS : 548 ( Part I )-1964 

16.1.1.2 Separating funnel — 500 ml capacity. 

16.1.1.3 Conical flasks — 250 to 300 ml capacity. 

16.1.1.4 Reflux condenser — any efficient reflux condenser, at least 65 cm 
long. 

16.1.1.5 Sand-bath or electric hot-plate with rheostat control 

16.1.2 Reagents 

16.1.2.1 Acetic anhydride — containing 95 to 100 percent (by weight) 
of the actual acetic anhydride. Determine the acetic anhydride content as 
follows: 

a) Weigh accurately about 2 g of the acetic anhydride into a 200-mI 
glass-stoppered conical flask, cool in ice and add 5 ml of freshly 
distilled aniline. Insert the glass stopper immediately, shake 
vigorously and allow to stand at room temperature for 30 minutes. 
Wash down the sides of the flask with 50 ml of ice-cold water. 
Mix well and titrate with previously standardised 1 N sodium 
hydroxide solution, using phenolphthalein as indicator, until the 
pink colour persists for 10 minutes. 

. __ Volume in ml of 1 N sodium hydroxide solution required 
Weight in g of acetic anhydride taken for the test 

b) Weigh accurately about 2 g of the acetic anhydride into another 
flask, add 50 ml of water, allow to stand for 30 minutes and 
titrate with the standard sodium hydroxide solution to the same 
end point as above using phenolphthalein as indicator. 

„ _ Volume in ml of 1 N sodium hydroxide solution required 
~~ Weight in g of acetic anhydride takenTor the test 

Acetic anhydride, 
percent by weight = 10209 (B— A ) 

16.1.2.2 Sodium bicarbonate solution — freshly prepared 0*5 percent 
( wjo ) and neutral to litmus. 

16.1.2.3 Anhydrous sodium sulphate 

16.1.2.4 Alcoholic potassium hydroxide solution — 0'5 N. 

16.1.2.5 Phenolphthalein indicator solution — Dissolve 01 g in 100 ml of 
60 percent rectified spirit. 

16.1.2.6 Standard hydrochloric acid — approximately 5 N. 

16.1.3 Procedure — Weigh accurately about 10 g of the material in a 
conical flask, add 20 ml of acetic anhydride and boil the mixture under a 
reflux air condenser for about 2 hours. Pour the mixture into a beaker 
containing 500 ml of water and boil for 15 minutes. Bubble a stream of 
carbon dioxide or nitrogen through the mixture during boiling to prevent 

53 



IS 1 548 (Part I )-1964 

bumping. Discontinue boiling, cool slightly, and remove the water with a 
siphon. Add another 500 ml of water and boil again. Discontinue 
boiling, cool and transfer the contents of the beaker to a separating funnel 
and reject the lower layer. Wash the acetylated sample successively 
(a) three times with 50 ml of water, (b) twire with 50 ml of sodium bicarbo- 
nate solution, and (c) twice with 50 ml of warm water (60 to 70*C). 
Drain and remove as much of the water as possible, and then transfer the 
acetylated sample to a beaker and add approximately 5 g of anhydrous 
sodium sulphate. Allow to stand for about one hour with occasional 
stirring. Filter through a dry filter paper, preferably in an oven at 100 
to 1 10°C, remove the filter paper and I eep the sample in the oven until it 
is thoroughly dry. Determine the saponification values of the original 
material and the acetylated product by the procedure described 
under 15.3. 

16.1.4 Calculation 

a) Acetyl value = ^l"^ „ s 

b) Hydroxyl value - ^^^ „ g. 

where 

S' = saponification value after acetylation, and 

S — saponification value before acetylation ( see 15 ). 

16.2 Method B 
16.2.1 Reagents 

16.2.1.1 Pyridine — Reflux with powdered barium oxide and distil. 
Use the fraction distilling above 1 14°C. 

16.2.1.2 Acetic anhydride 

16.2.1.3 Acetylating agent — Mix one volume of acetic anhydride a .d 
seven volumes of pyridine. 

16.2.1.4 Alcoholic sodium hydroxide solution — Prepare by dissolving 
sufficient aqueous caustic soda ( 60 percent wjp ) in 95 percent alcohol to 
make a 0-30 to 0*35 N solution. Remove the precipitated carbonate by 
filtering. 

The solution should be standardized against standard acid in the 
presence of phenolphthalein before use. The solution remains colourless 
for a long time if kept below 25°C. 

16.2.1.5 Normal butyl alcohol 

16.2.1.6 Phenolphthalein solution — Dissolve 0-1 g in 100 ml of 60 per- 
cent rectified spirit. 

Note — In the determination upon substances giving dark-coloured soap tohltioai, 
observation of the end point of the titration may be facilitated either (•) by the 

54 



IS J 548 ( Part I )-l964 

substitution of thymolphthalein or alkali blue 6B for phenolphthalein or (b) by the 
addition of one millilitre of 0-1 percent solution of methylene blue to each 100 ml 
of the phenolphthalein solution before the titration. 

16.2.2 Apparatus — A round-bottomed ace tylat ion flask made of resistance 
glass of capacity 150 to 200 ml with a 100-cm ground-in air condenser 
tube. 

16.2.3 Procedure 

16.2.3.1 Weigh accurately 0-5 to 3-0 g of fat in the acctylation flask. 
( The following weights serve as a rough guide for different types of 
materials : fatty alcohols 0'5 to 0-7 g, castor oil about one gram and ordinary 
oils 2 to 3 g.) Measure, or preferably weigh, from a 10-ml burette into 
the flask, 5 ml of the pyridinc-acetic anhydride mixture. Add the mixture 
drop wise, and allow no time for drainage. Before attaching the condenser, 
moisten the neck of the flask with pyridine to act as a seal, and make sure 
that the seal is maintained during the acetylation. 

16.2.3.2 Mix the fat and the acetylating agent by shaking well, add 
one or two small pieces of pumice, and boil the contents of the flask 
gently during 60 minutes, maintaining the boiling so that the vapour rises 
no higher than the bottom end of the condenser. In this way, the 
pyridine seal needs renewal less often, and there is less tendency for the 
ground-in joint to sieze. 

16.2.3.3 Cool the flask to about 50°C and with a rotary motion to 
assist in washing the condenser tube, add 5 ml of distilled water, from the 
top of the condenser. Shake the mixture well, and then boil it gently for 
5 to 10 minutes, shaking the flask two or three times during the boiling. 

16.2.3.4 After cooling the flask and the contents to room temperature 
and before detaching the condenser, wash the condenser with 30 ml of 
butyl alcohol. Detach the condenser and wash the neck and mouth of 
the flask and the tip of the condenser with a further 20 ml and then, if the 
contents of the flask are not homogeneous, add butyl alcohol until they 
become homogeneous. Titrate the free acetic acid with carbonate-free 
0-35 N sodium hydroxide solution, in the presence of a few drops of 
phenolphthalein as indicator. 

16.2.3.5 Carry out the same series of operations with 5 ml ofpyridine- 
acetic anhydride mixture alone, also with a corresponding weight of the 
oil or fat plus 5 ml of pyridine. 

Note — Owing to the presence of vapours of pyridine and butyl alcohol, it is 
preferable to carry out the tests in a fuming chamber. 

16.2.4 Calculation 

56 1 AT 



a) Hydroxyl value, H — r^- 

b) Acetyl value, A 



> + 0-000 75 H 
55 



IS 1 548 (Part D-1964 

where 

N ■* normality of sodium hydroxide solution; 

T =» volume of sodium hydroxide solution in ml corresponding 
to -the amount of acetylatcd fat formed 

«* a -f b — e 

where 

a, b and e are respectively the volumes in ml of 
sodium hydroxide required by blank with pyri- 
dine-acctic anhydiide mixture, fat plus pyridine, 
and fat plus pyridine plus acetic anhydride; and 

W = weight in g of fat or oil taken for test. 

Note — It is to be noted that a slight increase in the acetyl value has been found to 
occur with increasing free fatty acid content of the sample. 

17. DETERMINATION OF AIXYL /50THIOCYANATE 

17 .0 General — The oil obtained from black mustard seeds contains 
sinigrin and myrosin which, after maceration with water, yields a volatile 
oil, the major constituent of which is allyl uothiocyanate. The oil 
obtained from white mustard seeds contains acrinyl tVothiocyanate which 
is much less volatile than ailyl trothiocyanate. 

17.0.1 Method — The allyl uothiocyanate in the oil is steam distilled into 
a known excess of silver nitrate solution, and the excess of silver nitrate 
solution is determined by titration with standard ammonium thiocyanate 
solution. 

17.1 Apparatus 

17.1.1 Distillation Flask — 500-ml round-bottomed flask. 

17.1.2 Any Efficient Reflux Condenser — approximately 90 cm long. 

17.1.3 Measuring Flask — 200 ml capacity. 

17.1.4 Water-Bath 

17.2 Reagents 

17.2.1 Eth) I Alcohol — 95 percent ( by volume ) or rectified spirit [con- 
forming to IS: 323-1959 Specification for Rectified Spirit (Revised)] 
neutral to pheno phthalein. 

17.2.2 Silver Nitrate Solution — approximately 0*1 N. 

17.2.3 Ammonium Hydroxide Solution — 10 percent ( wjo ). 

17.2.4 Nitric Acid— conforming to *IS : 264-1950 Specification for Nitric 
Acid. 



*Since revised. 

56 



IS: 548 (Part I)-1964 

17.2.5 Ferric Ammonium Sulphate Indicator — 0-1 percent solution in water. 

17.2.6 Standard Ammonium Thiocyanatc Solution — approximately 0- 1 N. 

17.3 Procedure — Weigh accurately about 5 g of the material into a 
500-ml distillation flask and add to it 25 ml of ethyl alcohol, 250 ml of 
water and a few pieces of pumice stone. Distil the mixture in steam and 
collect the distillate in a 200-ml measuring flask containing exactly 25 ml 
of silver nitrate solution and 10 ml of ammonium hydroxide solution. 
Collect as rapidly as possible about 150 ml of the distillate. Attach the 
reflux air condenser to the measuring flask and heat the mixture' for about 
one hour on a boiling water-bath. Cool to room temperature, add water 
to make up to 200 ml and filter the contents after shaking. Take 100 ml 
of the filtrate, add 6 ml of nitric acid and a few drops of ferric ammonium 
sulphate indicator, and titrate with standard ammonium thiocyanate 
solution until a permanent red colour is obtained. Carry out a blank test 
at the same time. 

17.4 Calculation 

Allyl ijothiocyanate, percent 9.915 / g _ $\ jy 
by weight = -i__ 1 — 

where 

B « volume in ml of standard ammonium thiocyanate solution 
required for the blank determination, 

5 = volume in ml of standard ammonium thiocyanate solution 
required for the sample, 

}f «= normality of standard ammonium thiocyanate solution, 
and 

W «= weight in g of the sample taken for the test. 
18. DETERMINATION OF REICHERT-MEISSL VALUE 

18.0 General — The material is sipomfied by heating with glycerol 
sodium hydroxide solution and then split by treatment with dilute sulphu- 
ric acid. The volatile acids are immediately steam distilled. The soluble 
volatile acids in the distillate are filtered out and estimated by titration 
with standard sodium hydroxide solution. 

18.1 Apparatus — The assembly of the apparatus for distillation is shown 
in Fig. 9, and details of the constituent parts are given below: 

a) Flat-Bottom Boiling Flask — The flask (A) shall be made of resistance 
glass and shall conform to the dimensions given in Fig. 9. 

57 



IS t 548 (Part 1)4964 



37-iil'*00 



no a 



■60*4 




All dimension* In millimetre!. 
Pic. 9 Reichert-Meissl Distillation Apparatus 

58 



IS:548(Part I )-1964 

b) Still-Head— The still-head (B) shall be made of glass tubing of 
wall thickness 1 *25 ± 0*25 mm and shall conform to the shape 
and dimensions shown in Fig. 9 and 10. 



60*5 




180 i5 



All dimensions in millimetres. 

Fio. 10 Still-Head for Rbichert-Mbissl 
Distillation Apparatus 



A rubber stopper, fitted below the bulb of the longer arm of 
the still-head, and used for connecting it to the flask, shall have 
its lower surface 10 mm above the centre of the side-hole of the 
still-head. 

c) Condenser — The condenser ( C ) shall be made of glass and shall 
conform to the dimensions indicated in Fig. 9. 

d) Receiver — The receiver ( D) shall be a flask, with two graduation 
marks on the neck, one at 100 ml and the other at 1 10 ml. 

59 



IS: 548 (Part D-1964 

e) Asbestos Board — An asbestos board ( E ), 120 mm diameter, 6 mm 
in thickness, with a circular hole about 65 mm in diameter, shall 
be used to support the flask over the burner. During distillation, 
the flask shall fit snugly into the hole in the board to prevent the 
flame from impinging on the surface of the flask above the hole. 
A new asbestos board may conveniently be prepared by bevelling 
the edge of the hole, soaking in water, moulding the edge with a 
flask, and drying. 

f) Bunsen Burner — The burner ( F ) should be sufficiently large 
to allow the distillation to be completed in the time specified 
in 18.3.2. 

18.2 Reagents 

18.2.1 Glycerine — conforming 'o AR Grade of IS: 1796-1960 Speci- 
fication for Crude Glycerine and Refined Glycerine. 

18.2.2 Concentrated Sodium Hydroxide Solution — 50 percent ( wlw ). 
Dissolve sodium hydroxide in an equal weight of water and store the solu- 
tion in a bottle protected from carbon dioxide. Use the clear portion free 
from deposit. 

18.2.3 Pumice Stone Grains — approximately 1-4 to 20 mm in diameter. 

18.2.4 Dilute Sulphuric Acid Solution — approximately 1-0 N. 

18.2.5 Sodium Hydroxide Solution — 0-1 N solution in water, accurately 
standardized. 

18.2.6 Phenolphthalein Indicator — Dissolve 0-1 g of phcnolphthalein in 
100 ml of 60 percent rectified spirit. 

18.3 Procedure 

18.3.1 Weigh accurately 5-00 ± 0-01 g of the filtered oil or fat into the 
boiling flask. Add 20 g of glycerine and 2 ml of the concentrated sodium 
hydroxide solution from a burette to which access of carbon dioxide is 
prevented and whose orifice is wetted before running in the liquid, the 
first few drops from the burette being rejected. Heat the flask and its 
contents with continuous shaking on a gauze over the naked flame until 
the fat, including any drops adhering to the upper parts of the flask, has 
been saponified and the liquid becomes perfectly clear. Avoid overheating 
during this saponification. Cover the flask with a watch-glass, and allow 
the flask to cool a little. Add 90 ml of boiling distilled water which has 
l>een vigorously boiled for about 15 minutes. After thorough mixing, the 
solution should remain clear. If the solution is not clear ( indicating incom- 
plete saponification ) or is darker than light yellow ( indicating overheating ), 
repeat the saponification with a fresh sample of the oil or fat. If the sample 
is old, the solution may sometimes be dark and not clear. 

60 



IS: 548 (Part I )-1964 

18.3.2 Add 0-6 to 07 g of pumice stone grains and 50 ml of dilute 
sulphuric acid, and immediately connect the flask with the distilling 
apparatus. Place the flask on the asbestos board so that it fits snugly into 
the aperture. This will prevent the flame from impinging on the surface 
of the flask above the level of the liquid and avoid superheating of the 
system. After the fatty acids have melted and separated into a clear liquid 
layer on gentle warming, heat the flask without altering the flame so 
that 110 ml of liquid distils over in the course of 19 to 21 minutes. The 
distillation is considered to begin when the first drop forms in the still-head. 
Keep the water flowing in the condenser at a sufficient speed to maintain 
the temperature of the outgoing water from the condenser between 15°G 
and 20°C. Collect the distillate in a graduated flask. 

18.3.3 As soon as 110 ml have distilled over, stop heating the boiling 
flask and replace the graduated flask by a measuring cylinder of about 
25 ml capacity to catch drainings. Clo3C the graduated flask with the 
stopper, and, without making the contents, place it in a water-bath at 15°C 
for 10 minutes, making sure that the 110-ml graduation mark is below the 
level of the water. Swirl round the contents of the flask from time to time. 
Dry the outside of the flask and then mix the distillate by closing the flask 
and inverting it four or five times, but do not shake. Filter through a dry 
9-cm Whatman No. 4 filter paper. Reject the first 2 or 3 ml of the filtrate 
and collect the rest in a dry flask. 

Note — The filtrate should I- - free from insoluble fatty acidi. When operating on 
coconut oil, it has been noticed that this is not easily achieved. In cases where liquid 
insoluble fatty acids pass through the filter, transfer the filtrate to a separating funnel 
and after the separation of the lower aqueous layer, add the insoluble acids to the main 
bulk of insoluble acids. 

18.3.4 Pipette 100 ml of the filtrate in a titration flask, add 01 ml of 
phenolphthalein indicator solution and titrate with standard (0'1 N) 
sodium hydroxide solution until the liquid becomes slightly pink. 

18.3.5 Run a blank test without the fat but using the same quantities 
of reagents and following the same procedure. During the heating with 
caustic soda, avoid overheating which will be indicated by the darkening of 
the solution. 

18.4 Calculation — Reichert-Meissl value = ( A — B ) x N x 1 1 

where 

A ■» volume in ml of standard sodium hydroxide solution 
required for the test, 

B «- volume in ml of standard sodium hydroxide solution 
required for the blank, and 

JV-» normality of standard sodium hydroxide solution. 

Now — Kirkham, V. H. Analyst. Vol 45, P 293 ( 1920*) and Fine, S. D. Journal if 
Astotiatm •/ Ojgidal Agricultural Ckmistt. Vol 38,. P 319 ( 1955) have shown that at 

61 



IS t 548 ( Part I )-1964 

high altitudes, that ii, low barometric pressures, the Reichert-Meistl value determina- 
tion! are lower than those determined at atmospheric pressure. The correction formulae 
suggested by Kirkham were verified by Fine. 

Since the Rcichert-MeissI value varies with atmospheric pressure, corrections for the 
value are necessary when the determinations are made at places above sea-level or when 
barometric pressure is fluctuating widely from 760 mm. The corrected Rcichcrt»Mei*sl 
value shall be calculated as follows: 

Co E? J vS her, - = ^-'0) »<*™+,o 

log F 

where 

RM — observed Reichert-Meisil value, and 

P — barometric pressure in mm of mercury at the place and time of 
determination. 

19. DETERMINATION OF POLENSKE VALUE 

19.0 General — The condenser, the 25-ml cylinder and the receiver used 
in the Reichert-Meissl value determination are washed into the filter paper 
through which the distillate was filtered for that determination. After 
rinsing, the residue on the filter paper is taken up with ethyl alcohol and 
titrated with standard sodium hydroxide solution. 

19.1 Reagents — All the reagents required for determining the Reichert- 
Meissl value ( see 18.1 ) as well as the following are required. 

19.1.1 Ethyl Alcohol — 90 percent by volume, and neutral to 
phenolphthalein. 

19.2 Apparatus — the same apparatus as that required for the determina- 
tion of Reichert-Meissl value ( see 18.2 ). 

19 J Procedure — After determining the Reichert-Meissl value, detach the 
still-head and wash the condenser with threa successive 15-ml portions of 
cold distilled water, passing each washing separately through the measuring 
cylinder, the 110-ml flask with stopper, and the filter paper nearly filling 
the paper each time to the brim and draining each washing before filtering 
the next. The last 10 ml of wash-water should require not more than one 
drop of a l N sodium hydroxide solution for neutralization. Discard all the 
washings. 

Dissolve the insoluble acids by three similar washings of the 
condenser, the measuring cylinder, the 110-ml flask with stopper, and the 
filter paper with 15-ml portions of ethyl alcohol. Combine the alcoholic 
washings in a clean flask ( the tolal volume thus amounting to 45 ml ), add 
0"2oml of phenolphthalrin indicator solution, and titrate with standard 
(01 N ) sodium hydroxide solution until the solution turns slightly pink. 

19.4 Calculation 

Polenske value = 10 VN 

62 



IS : 548 ( Part I yl964 

where 

V ■■ volume in ml of standard sodium hydroxide solution 
required for the test, and 

JV— normality of standard sodium hydroxide solution. 

Not* — Like Reichert-MeinJ value, the Polenike value alio variei when determina- 
?°"' , ^7, e •« Mmoapheric pressure differing widely from 760 mm ( x« 1S.4 ). The 
corrected Polenike value nhall be calculated ai followi: 

Corrected Polenike value - ^l 76 **" 45 * 

P— 45 

where 

PV — obterved Polenike value, and 

P — barometric preuure in mm of mercury at the place and time of 
determination. 

20. DETERMINATION OF PEROXIDE VALUE 

20.0 General — The peroxide value is a measure of the peroxides 
contained in a sample of fat, expressed as milli-equivalents of peroxide 
per 1 000 grams of the material. 

20.1 Outline of the Method — The material in an acetic acid-chloroform 
medium, is treated with an aqueous solution of potassium iodide. The 
liberated iodine is titrated with standard sodium thiosulphate solution. 

20.2 Apparatus 

20.2.1 Piptttt — Graduated, 1 ml capacity. 

20.2.2 Conical flask — Glass-stoppered, 250 ml capacity. 
20.) Reagents 

20.3.1 Acetic Acid-Chloroform Solution — Mix three parts by volume 
of glacial acetic acid, with 2 parts by volume of chloroform. 

20.3.2 Potassium Iodide Solution — Saturated. Prepare saturated 
solution of potassium iodide in recently boiled distilled water. Store 
in the dark. 

20.3.3 Sodium Thiosulphate Solution — 0*1 N, accurately standardized. 

20.3.4 Sodium Thiosulphate Solution — 0*01 N. This solution is 
prepared by diluting 100 ml of accurately standardized solution of 0*1 N 
sodium thiosulphate to 1 000 ml with freshly boiled and cooled distilled 
water. 

20.33 Starch Solution — 1 percent. 

63 



IS 1 548 (Part I)-1964 

10.4 Proccdar* 

20.4.1 Weigh 5*00 ± 005 g of sample of fat in a 250-ml glass 
stoppered conical flask and then add 30 ml of the acetic acid-chloroform 
solution. Swirl the flask until the sample is dissolved. Add 0*5 ml of 
saturated potassium iodide solution. Allow the solution to stand 
exactly one minute with occasional shaking and then add 30 ml of 
distilled water. Titrate with 0*1 N sodium thiosulphate solution with con- 
stant and vigorous shaking. Continue titration until the yellow colour 
almost disappears. Add 0*5 ml of starch solution and continue titration 
till the blue colour just disappears. 

20.4.2 If the titre value is less than 0'5 ml, repeat the determination 
using 0*01 N sodium thiosulphate solution. 

20.4 3 Conduct a blank determination of the reagents in the same way. 
The titration in blank determination should not exceed 0*1 ml of the 
0* 1 N sodium thiosulphate solution. 

20.5 Calculation — Peroxide value as milli-equivalents per 1 000 grams 
^xnpfc _ (S-B)xXxlOOO 

where 

S mm volume in m] of sodium thiosulphate solution used up by 
the sample, 

B m volume in ml of the sodium thiosulphate solution used up 
in the blank determination, 

JV ma normality of the sodium thiosulphate solution, and 

g = weight in g of the sample. 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELH1 1 1 0002 

Telephones: 232301 31 , 23233375, 23239402 Fax: 91 +01 1 23239399, 23239382 

E - Mall : info® bis.org. in website : http://www.bis.org.in 

Central Laboratory: Telephone 

Plot No. 20/9, Site IV, Sahibabad Industrial Area, SAHIBABAD 201 010 277 0032 

Regional Offices: 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELH1 1 1 0002 2323 761 7 

'Eastern : 1/14CITSchemeVIIM,V.I.RRoad,Kankurgachi,KOLKATA700054 23378662 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 1 60022 260 9285 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI600113 2254 1984 

tWestern: Manakalaya, E9, MIDC, Behind Marol Telephone Exchange, 2832 9295 
Andheri (East), MUMBAI 400093 

Branch Offices: 

'Pushpak', Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, AHMEDABAD 380001 560 1348 

Peenya Industrial Area, 1 " Stage, Bangalore-Tumkur Road, BANGALORE 839 4955 

Commercial-cum-Office Complex, Opp. Dushera Maidan, Arera Colony, 242 3452 

Bittan Market, BHOPAL 46201 6 

62-63, GangaNagar.UnitVI.BHUBANESHWAR 751001 2403139 

5* Floor, Kovai Towers, 44 Bala Sundaram Road, COIMBATORE 641 01 8 221 0141 

SCO 21, Sector 12, Faridabad 121007 2292175 

Savitri Complex, 116 G.T. Road, GHAZIABAD 201001 286 1498 

53/5 Ward No. 29, R.G. Barua Road, 5th By-lane, Apurba Sinha Path, 245 6508 

GUWAHATI 781003 

5-8-56C, LN. Gupta Marg, Nampally Station Road, HYDERABAD 500001 2320 1084 

Prithavl Raj Road, Opposite Bharat Overseas Bank, C-Scheme, J Al PUR 302001 222 3282 

11/418 B, Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 223 3012 

Sethi Bhawan, 2"" Floor, Behind Leela Cinema, Naval Kishore Road, 261 8923 

LUCKNOW 226001 

H, No. 1 5, Sector-3, PARWANOO, Distt. Solan (H.P.) 1 73220 235 436 

Plot No A-20-21 , Institutional Area, Sector 62, Goutam Budh Nagar, NOIDA 201307 240 2206 

Patiiputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 80001 3 226 2808 

Plot Nos. 657-660, MarketYard, Gultkdi, PUNE 41 1037 24274804 

"Sahajanand House" 3'" Floor, Bhaktinagar Circle, 80 Feet Road, 237 8251 

RAJKOT 360002 
T.C. No. 2/275 (1 & 2), Near Food Corporation of India, Kesavadasapuram-Ulloor Road, 

Kesavadasapuram, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM 695004 255 791 4 

1" Floor, Udyog Bhavan, VUDA, Siripuram Junction, VISHAKHAPATNAM-03 271 2833 



'Sales Office is at 5 Chowringhee Approach, P.O. Princep Street, KOLKATA 700072 
tSales Office (WRO) Plot No. E-9, MIDC, Rd No. 8, Behind Telephone Exchange, 
Andheri (East), Mumbai-4000093 



23553243 



28329295 



Printed by the Manager, Government of India Press Faridabad, 2007 



