**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 2212 (1991): Code of practice for brickworks [CED 13: 
Building Construction Practices including Painting, 
Varnishing and Allied Finishing] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR TJ^ ^TT teMHI | ^t ^Wt ^^PTT ^f ^TT ^T^?TT \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



18 2212 : 1991 

( Reaffirmed 2005 ) 

( T^err <jRtaT ) 

Indian Standard 

BRICK WORKS— CODE OF PRACTICE 

f First Revision J 



First Reprint OCTOBER 1998 
UDC 693-22006-76 



® BIS 1991 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAPAR MARO 
NBW DELHI 110002 

Oetobtr 1991 Prka Gim» 9 



Building Construction Practices Sectional Committee, CED 13 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Building Construction Practices Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil 
Engineering Division Council. 

This standard was first published in 1962. In this revision types of bricks mentioned in the Table 1 have 
been modified to bring it in line with IS 1077 : 1991 'Common burnt clay building bricks {fifth revision )\ 
Further the materials to be used for mortar have been modified on the basis of IS 2250 : 1981 'Code 
of practice for preparation and use of masonry mortars {first revision )\ 

Figures showing a typical arrangement of cut-brick in a corner has been modified to show the normal 
practice adopted by Central Public Works Department and other organizations. 

The provisions of this standard do not limit its application to cases where only modular bricks are used; on 
the other hand, they can be applied with equal advantage to traditional bricks constructions as well as 
special size brick constructions. It is considered that this unified approach in the standard will be parti- 
cularly advantageous during the period of transition from traditional brick construction to modular brick 
construction resulting in significant saving in bricks, mortar and labour. 

It may be noted that the requirements bearing directly on the dimensions of bricks have been so worded 
as to be applicable both to modular and traditional bricks. For example, when the requirements for thick- 
ness of wall is stated as 'one brick' this will mean 20 cm nominal thickness in case of modular brick and 
9 inch nominal thickness in the case of traditional brick of size 9 in x 4 \ in x 3 in. 

This standard is intended chiefly to cover the technical provision relating to brickwork and it does not cover 
all the necessary provisions of a contract. 

This standard is one of a series of Indian Standards codes of practice covering masonry. Other standards 
in the series cover atone masonry and concrete block masonry. 




retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



I8 2212t 1991 



Indian Standard 
BRICK WORKS — CODE OF PRACTICE 

f First Revision J 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard covers the construction of brick 
masonry in general and the erection of brick 
walls in particular. 

1.2 Only masonry with clay bricks is dealt with 
in this standard. Use of unburnt bricks ( kachcha 
bricks ) and use of mud mortar are not specifically 
covered in this standard. 

2 REFERENCES 

The Indian Standards listed in Annex A are 
necessary adjucts to this standard. 

3 TERMINOLOGY 

3t0 For die purpose of this code, the following 
definitions shall apply. 

3.1 General 

Beam Filling — The filling of the gap between the 
ceiling level and the wall bearing level excluding 
portions occupied by beams, rafters, etc. 

Bond — The arrangement of the bricks in succes- 
sive courses tie the brickwork together both 
longitudinally and transversely; the arrangement 
is usually designed to ensure that no vertical joint 
of one course is exactly over the one in the next 
course above or below it, and there is the greatest 
possible amount of lap. 

Coping or Weathering — The cover applied over or 
the geometrical form given to a part of structure 
to enable it to shed rain-water. 

Corbel — A cantilever projecting from the face of 
a wail to form a bearing. 

Cornice — Horizontal ornamental feature project- 
ing from the face of a wall. 

Course — A layer of bricks including bed mortar. 

Damp-proof Course — A layer of impervious mate- 
rial laid or inserted in a structure to arrest the 
permeation of dampness. 

Efflorescence — A powdery encrustment of salts left 
by evaporation. This may be visible on the surface 
or may be below surface. In the latter case, this is 
termed as crypto-florescence. 



Footings — A projecting course or courses formed 
at the base of a wall to spread the load. 

Header — A brick laid with its length across the 

wall. 

Indenting — The leaving of recesses into which 

future work can be bonded. 

j am b _ The part of the wall at the side of an 
opening. 

Joint — A junction of Dricks. 

Bed Joint — Horizontal joint in brickwork or 
masonry. 

Cross Joint — A joint other than a bed point nor- 
mal to the wall face. 

Jointing — The operation of finishing joints as the 
masonry work proceeds ( see also 6*5.2 )• 

Nominal Thickness of a Wall — This is the thickness 
of wall that is stated in the estimates for calcula- 
tion of quantities. It is a 'fictitious' dimension, 
which is neither the actual thickness of wall ex- 
cluding surface finishes like plaster, rendering, etc, 
nor necessarily the overall thickness including 
such finishes. The following example will illustrate 
this point: 

Nominal Actual 
Thickness Thickness 

For traditional brick 
of 9 in length ( with 
allowance of J in 
for mortar joint ): 



One-brick wall 
1} -brick wall 


9 in 
13 * 
in 


8J to 81 in 
13 to 13| in 


2-brick wall 


18 in 


17J to 17» 
in 


For modular brick ( with 
allowance of 1 cm for 
mortar joint ): 






One-brick wall 
lj-brick wall 
2-brick wall 


20 cm 
30 cm 
40 cm 


19 cm 
29 cm 
39 cm 



Parapet — A solid or pierced guard wall for flat 
terrace of a balcony ( or a bridge ) or a curb wall 
at the lower part of a pitched roof, which is ex- 
posed to atmosphere on face, back and top. 

Perpend — An alignment of cross joints whicn can 
be checked with a plumb line. 



1 



IS 2212 s 19« 



Pointing — The operation of finishing joints subse- 
quent to the completion of masonry ( see 
also 6.5.3 ). 

Profile — A guide used for setting out brickwork 
accurately. 

Quoin — An external corner in brickwork; the 
term may also denote the masonry unit based to 
form the quoin. 

Backing Back — Stepping of the unfinished end of 
the wall masonry. 

Reveal — The visible part of each side of a recess 
or opening of a wall. 

Sleeper Wall — A dwarf wall usually honeycombed 
to carry a plate or sleeper supporting a joisted 

floor. 

Squint — A brick of special shape used at an 
obligue quoin ( see Fig. 1 A ). 



Stretcher — A brick laid with its length in the 
direction of wall. 

Toothing — Bricks left projecting in alternate 
courses to bond with future work. 

3.2 Materials 

Bat — Any portion of a brick, cut or broken across 
its length usually known according to its fraction 
from the whole size, for example, 1/2-bats, 3/4 
bats, etc. 

Closer — Part of a brick either manufactured or 
cut from a whole brick and used to maintain 
bond. 



Bevelled Closer — Illustrated in Fig. IB. 
King Closer — Illustrated in Fig. 1G. 
Queen Closer — Illustrated in Fig. 1 D. 

Facing Bricks — Bricks which, being exposed to 
view as in the case of unplastered surfaces, are 
required to have pleasing appearance, sufficient 
resistance to penetrations by rain and greater 
durability than common bricks. 

Flashing — A sheet of impervious material fixed 
to a structure so as to cover an intersection or 
joint where water will otherwise leak through. 

Templet — A pattern of sheet metal used as a guide 
for setting out specific section and shape. 




1A Squint 




1B Bevelled Closer 




10 Queen Closer 
L — Length of modular brick 
W — Width of modular brick 
H mm Height of modular brick 

Fig. 1 Different Types of Part-Bricks 



IS 2212 t 1991 



Template or Bed Block — A block of stone or con- 
crete bedded on a wall to distribute the pressure 
from a concentrated load. 

3.3 Tools and Accessories 

3.3*1 Tools required for brick masonry work, such 
as plumb line} rules, straight edges, trowels, etc, 
are described in IS 1630 : 1984. 

3.3*2 Scaffolding and Staging 

These are temporary frame works commonly of 
bamboo, timber or tubular steel, having verticals, 
horizontals and diagonal braces secured or leashed 
together with nails, ropes or other types of faste- 
ners, such as clamps. These are used for support- 
ing ramps and working platforms from which the 
construction work at higher levels is carried out* 
Scaffoldings are of two types, namely, single and 
double scaffolding. Single scaffolding consists of a 
row of verticals connected to walls by horizontals 
supported on and tied to the structure. Double 
scaffolding consists of two rows of verticals secured 
or leashed together with horizontal and diagonal 
bracings, forming essentially a structure indepen- 
dent of the building. It may, however, be also 
connected to the structure at convenient points 
for the sake of better stability. 

3.3.3 Storey Rods 

These are battens of wood running one or more 
floor heights and /having permanent markings 
corresponding to the location of brick courses at 
various heights and of all openings, sills, lintels, 
sun-shades and similar features occurring in the 
floors. 

4 NECESSARY INFORMATION 

4.1 For efficient planning, design and execution 
of the work, detailed information with regard to 
the following shall be furnished to those responsi- 
ble for the work: 

a) Layout plans showing the orientation of the 
structure; 

b) Dimensioned details of the structure with 
details of sections ( to a suitably large scale 
that is 1/20 or 1 cm = 20 cm ), levels of 
foundations, finished ground levels, clear 
floor to floor heights of rooms, sizes of 
openings, etc. 

c) Type and class of brickwork, types of bond 
and final finish for the brickwork; the mixes 
of mortar to be used, etc; full size details of 
architectural features, mouldings and other 
special work. 

d) Location and other details of openings, 
chases, embedments of service lines, such as 
for water supply, drainage, electrical instal- 
lations, etc; and location and details of 



hearths, flues and 
work. 



chimneys in the brick- 



4.2 All information as in 4.1 shall be made avail- 
able to those who are responsible for the masonry 
work. Necessary drawings and instructions for 
planning the work shall be furnished. 

4.3 Arrangements shall also be made for the 
proper exchange of information between those 
engaged in masonry work and all those whose 
work will affect or will be affected. 

5 MATERIALS 

5.1 Bricks 

5.1.1 Unless specified otherwise, burnt-clay bricks 
used shall conform to IS 1077 : 1991. Heavy duty 
brick as per IS 2180 : 1991 shall be used when 
the building is subjected to very heavy loading. 

5.2 Mortars 

Mortars for masonry shall be prepared in accord- 
ance with IS 2250 i 1981. The ingredients used 
in mortar shall conform to the requirements speci- 
fied in 5.2.1 to 5.2.6* 

5.2.1 Cement 

Cement used for brick masonry shall conform to 
IS 269 : 1976 or IS 455 : 1976 or IS 1489 : 1976 
or IS 3466 : 1968 or IS 8041 : 1978 or IS 8043 ; 
1978. 



5.2.2 Lime 

Lime used for brick masonry shall conform to 
IS 712 : 1984. 

NOTE — Hydraulic and semi-hydraulic limes corres- 
ponding to Glass A, B and E of IS 712 : 1984 are 
conveniently available for use in masonry mortars, 
whereas fat limes, corresponding to Class C and D will 
require mixing of burnt clay pozzolana and other 
pozzolanic material, Glass G and D limes may also be 
used with addition of cement and pozzolanic material. 
Quick lime shall never be used for structural purpose. 
It must be slacked first. Slacking at site shall be done in 
accordance with IS 1635 : 1975. 



5.2.3 Lime Pozzolana Mixture 

lime pozzolana mixture used for brick masonry 
shall conform to IS 4098 : 1983. 

5.2.4 Pozzolana 

5.2.4.1 Calcined clay pozzolana shall conform to 
IS 1344 : 1981. 

5.2.4.2 Fly ash shall conform to IS 3812 : 198L 



IS 2212 i 1991 



5.2.5 vtn$ Aggregate 

Sand shall conform to IS 2116 : 1980. 

5.2.6 Water 

Water used for making masonry mortars shall be 
clean and free from injurious quantities of delete* 
rious materials. Potable water is generally consi- 
dered satisfactory for use in masonry mortar. For 
further requirements regarding limits of deleterious 
materials permitted in water, reference may be 
made to IS 456 : 1978. 

5.3 Material* for Damp-proof Course* 

Materials for damp-proof courses shall be specified 
to conform to one of the relevant Indian Stand- 
ards or other requirements stated below: 



a) Bituminous felts for 
waterproofing and 
damp-proofiing 

b) Bituminous com- 
pounds for water- 
proofing purposes 

c) Mortar or concrete 
for use in damp* 
proof course 

d) Stone slab for 
damp-proofing 



Conforming to 
IS 1322 : 1982 



Conforming to 
IS 1580 : 1969 



Conforming to 
6A1.1 



Conforming to 
6.8.1.2 



5.4 Material* for Flashing and Weathering 

These shall be specified to conform to one of the 
relevant Indian Standards stated below: ' 



a) Lead Flashing 



b) Bituminous Felts 



Conforming to IS 405 
f Part 2) : 1977 and the 
thickness shall be bet- 
ween 1*6 and 2 mm* 

Conforming to IS 1322 : 
1982. 



5.5 Metal Reinforcement 

Metal reinforcement for use in brick masonry 
shall be specified to conform to one of the rele- 
vant Indian Standards stated below: 

a) Mild steel or Conforming to IS 432 
medium tensile (Part 1 and 2 ) : 1982 
steel bars 

b) Steel fabric or Conforming to IS 1566 : 
hard-drawn steel 1982 

wire 

c) Expanded metal Conforming to IS 412 : 

1975 



d) Other suitable 
metal reinforce- 
ment, such as 
galvanized hoop 



These shall be made of 
structural steel conform- 
ing to IS 226 : 1975 



iron 



6 DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS 

6.1 Selection of Brick* 

6.1.1 For use in various situations of brick 
masonry, the brick shall be selected in accordance 
with Table 1. 

6.1*2 When the requirements for strength of 
masonry predominate in the particular situation 
of use, the bricks shall be of such grade ( see IS 
1077 : 1991 ) as to give the required strength for 
masonry and shall be selected in accordance with 
their relevant provisions of IS 1905 : 1987. 

6.2 Selection of Mortars 

6.2.1 Mortars used for brick masonry shall con- 
form generally to IS 2250 : 1981. 

6*2.2 The selection of mortar will also be gover- 
ned by the strength required for masonry and 
reference may be made in IS 1905 : 1987 for 
knowing the suitability of combination of various 
types of mortars and grades of bricks for different 
strengths required for the masonry. 

6.3 Types of Bonds and Their Suitability 

6.3.1 The primary object of bond is to give 
strength to masonry, but it may also be employed 
to create artistic effects when the brickwork is 
exposed to view. 

The types of bonds generally in use, their charac- 
teristics and situations of use are described in 
Table 2. 

6.3.2 In brickwork the cross joints in any course 
shall not be nearer than a quarter of brick 
length from those in the course below or above it. 

6"4 Thickness of Joint 

6.4*1 No bed joint shall be thicker than 12 mm. 
Further the thickness of the bed joints shall be 
such that four courses and three joints taken con- 
secutively shall measure as follows: 



i) In the case of 
traditional bricks 



b) In the case of 
modular bricks 
conforming to 
IS 1077 : 1991 



Equal to four times the 
actual thickness of the 
brick plus 3 cm 

Equal to 39 cm 



6.5 Finishing of Joints 

6.5.1 The face joints of brickwork may be finished 
by 'jointing' or by 'pointing*. 



IS 2212 1 1991 



Table 1 Selection of Building Bricks 

( Clause 6.1.1 ) 



SI 
No, 

(1) 
1. 



of Use 



(2) 



Facing 



2. a) SuWect to very heavy 



b) Requiring a high resis- 
tance to water penetra- 
tion 

3. a) Plinths and foundations 
below damp-proof 

course — ground well 
drained and no chance 
of continual wetting in 
foundations 

b) Plinths and foundations 
below damp-proof 

course — subsoil water 
table at a high level 



Type of Bricks to 
be Used 

(3) 

Glass 12*5 common bricks 
(m« 1077: 1991) 



Heavy duty ( see IS 2180 ; 
1988) 

do 



Special Consideration 



(4) 

Bricks shall be free from 
minor defects, such as 
chipi at the edge of cor- 
ners. Colour and texture 
may also be specified if so 
required 



Remark* 

(5) 



Class 12 
common 
IS 1077 : 



5 or Class 7*5 
bricks ( see 
1991) 



do 



4. a) External walls, neither 
plastered nor rendered 
on the outer face 

b) External walls finished 
on both faces with a 
water-tight plaster or 
rendering 



5. Internal walls 



Class 12*5 common bricks 
(mIS 1077: 1991 ) 



Class 7*5 or better quality 
common bricks ( see IS 
1077 : 1991 ) 



Class 7'5 common bricks 
(m# IS 1077: 1991) 



6, Free standing walls, para- Class 12*5 common bricks 
pets ( see IS 1077 : 1991 ) 



The bricks shall be free 
from efflorescence. They 
shall also not have any salt 
content which will affect 
the mortar of the masonry* 
The bricks may preferably 
be the denest available 
with the minimum water 
absorption 

The bricks shall preferably The exposed joints shall be 
be of uniform colour pointed with a dense water 

tight mortar 

— For situations exposed to 
severe weather ( see 
Table 3 ) only Class 12*5 
common bricks shall be 
used as in 4(a). 

— Class 3*5 common bricks 
also may be considered for 
use, provided they satisfy 
the requirements for stre- 
ngth ( see IS 1077 : 1991 ) 
For walls which are liable 
to be frequently in contact 
with water such as in bath- 
rooms, only Class 7*5 or 
better bricks shall be used 

A dense water-tight mortar 
shall be used for the maso- 
nry. Parapets shall prefer- 
ably be finished on all 
sides with a water-tight 
plaster 



IS 2212 1 1991 



Table 2 Common Types of Bonds for Brickwork and Situations of Their Use 

( Clause 6.3.1 ) 



SI 
No. 



(0 

1. English Bond 



Type* of Bond 

(2) 



Characteristic* 



(3) 

The. brick* in the facing are 
laid in alternate courses 
of headers and stretchers 
(*«Fig. 2). The header 
course is commenced 
with a quoin header 
followed by a queen clo- 
ser and continued with 
successive headers. The 
stretcher course is formed 
of stretchers having a 
minimum tap of one- 
quarter their length aver 
the header 



Situation of Use 



(4) 

The bond Contributes sub- 
stantially to the strength 
of brickwork, and may be 
particularly suitable for 
walls carrying heavy 
loads 



Remark 



(5) 

Less efficient bonds may 
also be successfully used 
for obtaining strength 
provided the mortar is 
strong 



2* Double Flemish Bond 



3. Single Flemish Bond 



The courses both in the 
facing and in the backing 
are formed with alterna- 
ting stretchers and head- 
ers. In order to obtain 
the lap ( which is equal 
to one-quarter the length 
of the bricks ) a queen 
closer is introduced next 
to the quoin header in 
alternate courses, the 
intervening ones com- 
mencing with a stretcher 
and every header will 
obtain a location that is 
central with respect to 
the stretcher above or 
below ( stt Fig. 3 ) 

This facilitates the facing 
of the wall to be in Fle- 
mish bond and the back- 
ing in English bond. This 
will entail use of snap 
headers ( see Fig. 4 ) 



The appearance on the 
face may be considered 
as more uniform than in 
English bond. Requires 
less number of facing 
bricks than English bond 
and hence may be econo- 
mical where brickwork is 
faced with special facing 
bricks and exposed to 
view 



Though considered inferior 
in strength than English 
bond, this bond may be 
suitable for single-brick 
thick walls in normal 
house construction provi- 
ded a strong mortar, such 
as cement mortar, is 
used 



This attempts to combine 
partially the better appe- 
arance of Flemish bond, 
with the better strength 
of English bond. However, 
increase in strength over 
Double Flemish bond is 
doubtful 



4. Garden Wall Bond 



One-brick thick walls are 
easier to construct with 
these bonds than with 
pure Flemish or English 
bonds and save facing 
bricks considerably in the 
case of exposed work 



American 
known 
Bond) 



English garden wall bond 
( ste Fig, 5 ) consists of a 
header course with the 
necessary queen closer 
next to quoin header to 
three or sometimes even 
five stretcher courses run- 
ning in series with over- 
lap of half- brick between 
stretcher over stretcher 

Flemish garden wall bond 
( ste Fig. 6 ) consists of 
alternate courses compo- 
sed of one header to 
three sometimes even 
five stretchers in series 
throughout the length of 
the courses 

Bond ( also Consists ( set Fig. 7) of For general use 
as Common one header course to a 

number of stretcher 

courses 



Commonly adopted in 
America. The number 
of stretcher courses may 
vary from five to seven 

( Contir.utd ) 



IS 2212 1 1991 



Table 2 ( Continued ) 



si 

No. 



Typee of Bead 



0) (2) 

6. Stretcher Bond 



Header Bond 



NOTES 



Gharacterlatic* 



(3) 

In this bond ( ;« Fig. 8 ) 
all the courses are stret- 
cher courses and the 
overlap is usually half 
brick and is obtained by 
commencing each alter- 
nate course with a half- 
bat 

With slight modification at 
the quoin the overlap 
may be varied to f or J 
brick and the bond is 
then known 'faking Strih 
ehtrBtmT 

The facing of this bond 
( s« Fig, 9 ) has all the 
courses as headers only 
and the overlap* which it 
half the wk|th of the brick 
is obtained by introduc- 
ing a three-quarter bat 
in each alternate course 
at quoins 



Situation of Use 



(4) 

Used in fbrick thick 
leaves of cavity walls 



Remark* 

(5) 



Used for walls curved on 
plan for better align- 
ment; and preferably in 
foundation footings of 
brick masonry for better 
transverse distribution 



1 Several other special bonds are also in vogue, such as Monk Bond, Dutch Bond, English Cross Bond and mixed 
bonds of various types which give different artistic effects so far as appearance is concerned. 

2 The bonds described above have been developed largely as a result of the traditional 9 in X 4} in x 3 in bricks, 
but all have been found to be suitable for modular bricks of size 20 cm X 10 cm x 10 cm. In the course of use of 
modular bricks more bonds may be evolved for giving improved functional characteristics to the masonry. 




COURSE 'B' 



Fig. 2 English Bond 
7 



IS 2212 1 1991 



-COURSE V 



COURSE V 




Fio. 3 Double Flemish Bond 



COURSE B 




Fig. 4 Single Flemish Bond 



18 2218 1 1991 



COURSE *C 



COURSE B' 




Fig. 5 English Garden Wall Bond 



COURSE 'B* 




Fig. 6 Flemish Garden Wall Bond 



IS 2212 1 1M1 



• COURSE 'C 



COURSE 'B' 



COURSE 'A' 




Flo. 7 Ambwcan Bond 
r SLATE CLOSURE TO JAMB 



B 
A- 



ill 1 1 1 1 ■ 1 










1 






PLAN OF COURSE 'B* 




L 


1 


















n 














PLAN OF COURSE 'A' 










1 1 1 











































































ELEVATION 
NOTE — Um of Stretcher bond in cavity wall construction it illustrated here. 

Fio. 8 Strbtchbr Bond 



10 



IS 2212 1 19S1 




PLAN OF COURSE A 



B 
A 



□ 



F? 



ELEVATION 
Fig. 9 Header Bond 



€•5*2 In jointing, either the face joints of the 
mortar shall be worked out while still green to 
give a finished surface flush with the face of the 
brickwork, or the joints shall be squarely raked 
cut to a depth of 10 mm while the mortar is still 
green for subsequent plastering. The faces of brick- 
work shall be cleaned with wire brush so as to 
remove any splashes of mortar during the course 
of raishing the brickwork. 

6.5.3 In pointing, the joints shall be squarely 
raked out to a depth of 15 mm while the mortar 
is still green and the raked joints shall be well 
brushed to remove dust and loose particle and 
well wetted, and shall be later completely refilled 
with mortar to give the required finish. Some such 
finishes are 'flush', 'weathered', 'tucked', 'ruled', 
etc ( see Fig. 10 ). 

NOTE — Pointing will offer facilities for introducing in 
the face joints a mortar specially prepared with regard 
to composition, colour* etc. 

6.6 Structural and Functional Characteris- 
tics of Brickwork 

6.6.1 Structural Stability and Strength 

Reference may be made to IS 1904 : 1986 and 
IS 1905 : 1987 for design with regard to structu- 
ral stability. 

6.6.2 Resistance to Moisture Penetration 

6*6*24 Rain water penetrates solid brickwork 
either through cracks or through the body of the 
bricks or mortar. Unrendrcd walls permit more 




FLUSH JOINT 



WEATHERED 
JOINT 



KEYED 

JOltfT 



TUCKED 
JOINT 



RULED J0!NT 



Fig. 10 Different Types of Pointing Finishes 
for Brickwork 



11 



IS 2212 > 1991 



water to pass through than rendered walls, and 
therefore shall not be relied on to give protection 
from rain except under sheltered or moderate 

conditions. 

6.6.2*2 Resistance to rain penetration will be 
incrased by rendering which prevents the access 
of water through the joints of brickwork except 
in small quantities passed through by capillary 
action. Rendered walls are, therefore, suitable for 
severe conditions provided other requirements, 
such as sufficient thickness, use of satisfactory 
materials, and workmanship are also satisfied. 

6.6.2.3 A cavity wall will provide a perfect 
barrier to rain penetration. Even when the outer 
part of the wall gets wet, the inner one will 
remain absolutely dry. 

6*6.2.4 Table 3 indicates the suitability of various 
walls under different conditions of exposure. 

Table 3 Suitability of Walls for 
Vaiiou* Exposures 

( Clause 6.6.2.4 ) 





R » Recommended 






N «■ Not Recommended 




SI 
No. 


Construction 

r 




Exposure 




Sheltered 


Moderate 


Severe 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


14) 


(5) 


1. 


Unrendred J-brict 
thick wall 


N 


N 


N 


2. 


Unrendred 1 -brick 
thick solid wall 


R 


N 


N 


3. 


Unrendered lj-brick 
thick solid wall 


R 


R 


N 


4. 


Rendered solid wall 


R 


R 


N 


5. 


Cavity wall or rende- 
red one-brick thick 
solid wall 


R 


R 


R 



NOTE — Exposure conditions to wind and rain may be 
broadly divided into sheltered, moderate and severe 
locations. 

Sheltered Conditions are, for example, regions of low rain- 
fall ( below 750 mm per annum ) and where brickwork 
is protected by the proximity of buildings of similar 
or greater heights. Brickwork in the lower two storeys 
of buildings of such locations will fall in this group. 

Moderate Conditions are obtained where the exposure is 
neither sheltered nor severe. 

Sever* Conditions are obtained where the brickwork is 
exposed to a moderate gale accompanied by a persistent 
rain. Brickwork that projects well above the surrounding 
buildings will, especially* be severely exposed. 



6.6.3 Thermal Stresses 

The coefficients linear expansion of bricks vary 
from 5 x 10~ 6 to 11 x 10~« per degree Centi- 
grade. Variations of temperature tend to produce 
linear changes in walls which, when restrained, 
may lead to internal stress resulting in cracks 
especially when the walls exceed 30 m ( 100 feet ). 
The effects of these stresses shall be taken into 
consideration for a proper design. 

6.6.4 Control of Shrinkage Cracking 

6.6.4.1 When bricks having a drying shrinkage of 
not more than 002 percent are used, fine hair 
cracks appear in the joints. These may usually be 
ignored. With bricks of higher shrinkage values, 
major cracks may appear through the brickwork. 
To confine cracks to the joints and to dissipate 
these into a large number of fine joints, it is desi- 
rable that the mortar used shall be weaker than 
the bricks. 

6.6.4.2 Cracking due to shrinkage normally will 
occur at openings or other points where the verti- 
cal or horizontal section of a wall changes. A long 
wall with a few openings will tend to show wider 
cracks above and below the openings than a simi- 
lar wall with many openings. Metal reinforcement 
may be embedded in brickwork at points where 
cracking is likely to occur. 

6.6.5 Thermal Insulation 

6.6.5.1 For requirements of thermal insulation in 
walls, reference may be made to IS 3792 : 1978. 

The thermal transmittance ( U-value ) of 1 -brick 
(200 mm) thick wall with 15 mm plaster on 
both sides will be about 19 5 K cal/m*hdeg C ( or 
0-4 Btu/ft f hdeg F ). 

6.6.6 Fire Resistance 

For requirements regarding resistance to fire, 
reference may be made to IS 1642 : 1988. 

6.6.7 Sound Insulation 

Requirements for insulation against air-borne 
sound are laid down in IS 1950 : 1962 and 
reference may be made to that standard in this 
connection. 

6.6.8 Durability 

Deterioration of brickwork arises due to following 
causes: 

a) Disintegration due to soluble salts present 
in the brickwork or when the brickwork is 
in contact with subsoil water containing 
soluble salts ( see Note 1 ); 

b) Disintegration due to impurities present in 
the bricks which, under certain conditions 
are liable to disrupt the brickwork ( see 
Note 2 ); 



12 



IS 2212 : 1991 



c) Disintegration due to frost action ( see 
Note 3 ); and 

d) Corrosion of iron or steel in reinforced 
brickwork. 

NOTES 

1 When a wall is subjected to continued wetting or 
alternate drying and wetting, the soluble salts therein, 
mostly sulphates of alkalis present in the bricks get 
dissolved and interact with certain components of 
cement or hydraulic lime in the mortar and rendering, 
resulting in the formation of new compounds with 
increased volume and consequent cracks in the bricks 
or in the mortar. Under similar circumstances disinteg* 
ration also occuri due to the crystallization of certain 
salts like magnesium sulphate just inside the surface 
pores of the bricks giving rise to severe surface decay. 

2 Nodules of quick lime in the bricks when they get 
hydrated due to soaking in water during construction or 
subsequent dampness expand in volume setting up dis- 
ruptive effect on the bricks. 

3 When the brickwork is saturated with water and ex- 
posed to freezing conditions, the expansion of water 
following the freezing has a disruptive effect on the 
bricks. 

-6.7 Footings 

For construction of foundation footings in brick- 
work reference may be made to IS 1080 : 1985. 

6.8 Damp-Proof Courses 

6.8.1 The function of a damp-proof course is to 
prevent the passage of water from an external 
source into a structure or from one part of a 
structure to another. Damp-proof courses may 
consist of flexible material like tar or bitumen 
felts, or of a layer of dense concrete or slates or 
cuddappah stone slabs. 

6.8.1.1 Damp-proofing with a layer of concrete 
shall conform to the following requirements: 

a) Size of stone aggregate 10 mm nominal 
to be used size ( see IS 383 : 

1970) 



b) Mix of concrete 



1:2:4 



c) Thickness of concrete Not less than 4 cm 
layer 

d) The concrete layer 
shall be provided with 
a waterproofing treat- 
ment which may be 
either a surface treat- 
ment or with integral 
waterproofing com- 
pounds 

NOTE — For surface treatment of concrete damp- 
proof course, it is found by experience that painting 
with hot bitumen at the rate of 17 kg/100 m" is satis- 
factory. 

-6.8.1.2 Slates and cuddappah stone slabs used for 
-damp-proofing shall be not less than 40 mm thick. 



6.8.1.3 The damp-proof course shall occupy the 
full width of the wall just below it, and shall be 
provided even under door openings. 

6*8.2 Damp-proof course may be horizontal or 
vertical and will be required at one or all of the 
locations as below: 

a) Below the lowest floor level to prevent entry 
of water from the soil; 

b) Above ground level to prevent water from 
rising up the wall; and 

c) At openings, parapets, etc, to prevent 
access of rain-water into the structure. 

6.8.3 Where the lowest floor of a structure is 
below the finished ground level, a horizontal 
damp-proof course through the body of the wall, 
below the level of the underside of the floor will 
be required. This will have to be connected in 
the external walls through a vertical damp-proof 
course to the horizontal damp-proof course above 
ground level. This, in effect, seals the basement 
from ingress of water. 

6.8.4 All walls in a building shall be provided 
with a damp-proof course which is at least 15 cm 
above the finished ground or plinth protection 
level and preferably immediately below the under- 
side of the ground floor. The damp-proof course 
shall run without a break throughout the length 
of the wall, even under door or other openings. 

6*8.5 Damp-proof courses shall be provided on 
the jambs and at the top of openings where such 
openings occur in cavity walls. The damp-proof 
course in the jambs shall be vertical and shall be 
provided at the junction of the internal and exter- 
nal parts of the cavity wall so as to prevent ingress 
of dampness from the external part of the wall to 
the internal leaf ( see Fig. 11 ). A flexible damp- 
proof course ( see Fig. 12) shall be provided at 
die top to protect the lintel head from the water 
which flows down through the cavity above and 
to drain it off outside through weep holes. 

6.8.6 In parapets, where the coping is of an im- 
pervious material like stone or dense concrete, no 
damp-proof course may be necessary across the 
wall. Where the coping is of a previous nature, it 
may be necessary to interpose a flexible damp- 
proof course about 15 to 20 cm above the finished 
roof level and carry it down the inside face of the 
wall to the lower face of the drip course. Damp- 
proofing of parapets in the case of cavity walls 
construction is illustrated in Fig. 13. 

6.8.7 Damp-proofing details under architectural 
features is illustrated in Fig. 14. 

6.9 Cavity Wall 

6.9.1 The outer and inner leaves of a cavity wall 
may be of the same material or of different mate- 
rials, such as brickwork and concrete, etc. The 



13 



IS 2212: 1991 




FLEXIBLE DAMP-PROOF 

COURSE OVER SUPPORTS RG.12A) 



K- — SUPPORT OF APPROPRIATE 
LENGTH 



FLEXIBLE VERTICAL 
DAMP-PROOF COURSE- 



FRAME TO OPENING 



OUTSIDE plan 

11A Details with Frame for Opening on Outside 

FLEXIBLE DAMP-PROOF 

COURSE OVER SUPPORT (see fk}.mb> 

— SUPPORT OF APPROPRIATE 
LENGTH 




WALL TIE I - g B BA T 

SLATE DAMP- / / 

proof rniiPQF-/ Lcn 



PROOF COURSE 
OUTSIDE 



FRAME TO OPENING 



PLAN 



11B Details with Frame for Opening on Inside 

Fig. 11 Details of Damp-Proof Courses at Jamb for Openings in Cavity Wall 



thicker leaf shall be arranged on the inside and 
the cavity or space between the two leaves of the 
wall shall be between 4 cm to 8 cm. 

6*9.2 The function of the wall ties is to bind to- 
gether the outer and inner leaves of a cavity wall . 
This shall be spaced not more than four brick - 
lengths apart horizontally and not more than 5 
brick-heights vertically, and staggered. Additional 
ties shall be used near openings. There shall, at 
leas^ be 5 ties per square metre surface area of 
the wall. 

6.9.3 Ties may be of mild steel, flat iron or round 
bars, suitably twisted at their mid-point or sloped 
towards the exterior side so as to prevent water 
from flowing along it from outer to inner leaf. 



Ties shall be given a bituminous or other coat 
before insertion to protect them from corrosion. 

6.10 Bearing of Floor* and Roofs 

6.10.1 Timber Floor and Roofs 

It is not desirable to embed any structural timber 
in brickwork as it is liable to be affected by dry 
rot. Timber wall plates shall be protected with 
preservative if they have to be embedded in wall. 
The ends of timbers joists shaii preferably rest on 
corbels or brackets but when built into a wall they 
shall be treated with preservative, and in addition , 
space shall be left around them for free circulation 
of air. The ends of beams carrying heavy loads, 
and of trusses shall be supported on templates of 
concrete or stone to distribute the load over a 
greater area of brick wall. 



14 



IS 2212 1 1991 



INSIDE 



SUPPORT OVER 
OPENING 




OUTSIDE 



FLEXIBLE DAMP 
PROOF COURSE 



FRAME TO 
OPENING 



SECTION 
12A Head of Opening with Frame on Outside 

inside n/n \s-yr outside 



SUPPORT OVER 
OPENING 




FLEXIBLE DAMP- 
PROOF COURSE 



METAL 
FLASHING 



FRAME TO 
OPENING 



SECTION 
12B Head of Opening with Frame on Inside 

Fig. 12 Details of Damp-Proofing at Lintel Head Level 
for Openings m Cavity Walls 



COPING 

FLEXIBLE OR SEMI- 
RIGID DAMP PROOF 
COURSE 




LROOF 
CONSTRUCTION 




COPING 



DAMP PROOF 
COURSE FOP HIGH 
PARAPET 



RENDERING 
AS REOlMREt 



LROOF 
CONSTRUCTION 



13A Details where Parapet is also of Cavity 
Construction 



13B Details where Parapet is of Solid 
Construction 



Fig. 13 Dbtails of Damp-Proofing in Parapet Over Cavity Construction 



IS 



18X212:1991 




-FLEXIBLE DAMP- 
PROOF COURSE 



14A Plinth -Solid Wall 




METAL 
FLASHING 



14B String Course — Solid or Cavity Wall 

Fig. 14 Details of Damp-Proofing in 
Architbctural Projection 

6.10.2 Steel Beams 

The ends of steel beams embedded in masonry 
shall be built-in with space all round for repaint- 
ing or shall be protected with a thick bituminous 
coat or shall be encased in rich concrete of mix 
1:2:4. The ends shall generally be supported 
on templates of plain or reinforced cement con- 
crete of mix 1 : 2 : 4, or stone. 

6.10.3 RCC Floors and Roofs 

6.10.3.1 Reinforced cement concrete floor and 
roof slabs resting on the wall shall have a width 
of bearing not less than the effective depth of slab 
subject to a minimum of 10 cm. 



6.10.3.2 Where the bottom of the slab does not 
coincide with the level of a brick course, the level 
shall not be made up with cut bricks but the 
thickness of the slab at bearing shall be increased 
so that the bearing is directly on the brick course 
immediately below its level. 

6.10.3.3 Ends of RCC beams shall generally be 
placed on template of plain or reinforced cement 
concrete or stone. 

6.10.3.4 The ends of RCC slabs may bear on a 
layer of cement mortar (1:4 mix ) 12 to 20 mm 
thick. Its top surface shall be white-washed or 
otherwise suitably treated so as to minimize the 
friction to movement of the concrete slab over 
the bearing. 

6.11 Brickwork Round Openings 

6.11*1 Openings shall be of such a size and so 
spaced in walls as to reduce cutting of bricks to 
the minimum. The width of openings shall, as far 
as possible, be a multiple of the width of a brick. 

6*11.2 In external walls, it is desirable to rebate 
the sills, jambs and heads of openings so as to form 
a barrier for rain-water. The still shall be sloped 
slightly so as to allow rain-water to drain off. 

6.12 Parapets and Copings 

6.12.1 The thickness of parapets shall be such that 
their base covers the junction of roof slab and wall 
which shall be further effectively treated against 
possible leakage of rain-water as per IS 2115 : 
1980. 

6.12.2 Copings may be of stone, concrete, brick 
or terracotta and throated on the underside of the 
projection. The top of the coping shall be slightly 
sloped so as to allow rain-water to drain off 
( see 6.8.6 and Fig. 13 ). 

6.13 Architectural Features 

6.13.1 All projecting architectural features, such 
as plinth projections, string courses or cornices, 
shall be effectively bonded by tailing into the 
brickwork to ensure stability. Such architectural 
features shall be set straight and true with the 
finished joints as far as possible. 

6.13.2 When such features are not to be plastered 
over, they shall be built with brick which have 
high durability, resistance to abrasion and mois- 
ture penetration. Bricks specially made to required 
shape for this purpose shall be used, if possible 
otherwise, selected bricks rubbed and ground to 
correct shape and size may be used. 

6.13.3 Sun shades and such projecting features 
which depend on the men of brick masonry over 
them for their stability shall be kept supported 
till such time the brick masonry above is built and 
hardened sufficiently. 



16 



IS 2212 1 1991 



7 STORAGE AND HANDLING OF 
MATERIALS 

7.1 Bricks 

Bricks shall not be dumped at side. They shall be 
stacked in regular tiers even as they are unloaded, 
to minimise breakages and defacement of bricks. 
The supply of bricks shall be so arranged that, as 
far as possible, at least two days* requirements of 
bricks are available at site at any time. 

Bricks selected for different situations of use in 
the work shall be stacked separately. 

7.2 Cement 

-Cement shall be stored above ground level in per- 
fectly dry and watertight sheds. Cement shall be 
stacked not more than eight bags high. The bags 
shall be stacked in a manner to facilitate removal 
and use in the order in which they are received. 

7.3 Lime 

Quick lime shall, as far as possible, be slaked soon 
alter it is received. Storage of unslaked fat or 
semi-hydraulic lime is not desirable as the lime 
deteriorates by absorption of moisture from the 
atmosphere and also is likely to cause fires. 

JSlaked hydraulic lime shall be stored in the same 
way as cement as it sets quickly under damp 
conditions. 

7.4 Mortars 

7.4.1 The problem of storage of mortar does not 
arise in the case of cement and cement-lime mor- 
tar or lime mortars with hydrulic limes, as these 
have to be used immediately. Lime mortars using 
semi-hydraulic Hmes which sometimes require to 
be used after a day or two after their grinding, 
shall be prevented from drying out by protective 
covering and by occasional sprinkling of water. 

7.4.2 Mortars shall be well mixed and shall be 
transported from the mixing platform to the site 
of work in such a manner as to prevent formation 
of laitance or segregation. 

* SETTING OUT 

BA Generally the site shall be cleared of grass 
roots, tree stumps, etc, before the building lines are 
set out. In case of sloping terrain care shall be 
taken to ensure that the dimensions on plan are 
set out correctly in one or more horizontal planes. 

8.2 The building lines shall be set out with steel 
tapes. Setting out of angles shall be with theodo- 
lite in case of important and intricate structures 
where the lengths of arms exceed 1 6 m. In other 
-cases they may be set out by measurement of 
-sides In rectangular or square setting out, diago- 
nals shall be checked to ensure accuracy. 



B.3 The setting out of walls shall be facilitated by 
permanent rows of pillars, parallel to and at a 
fixed distance beyond the periphery of the build- 
ing. The pillar shall be located at the junctions of 
cross walls with the periphery of the building. 
The pillars shall be located at the junctions of 
cross walls with the peripheral lines of pillars. 
The centrelines of the cross walls shall be extended 
to and permanently erected on the plastered tops 
of the corresponding sets of pillars. The datum lines 
parallel to and at the known fixed distance from 
the centre lines of the external walls, shall also 
be permanently marked on the corresponding 
rows of pillars to serve as checks on the accuracy 
of the work as it proceeds. The tops of these pillars 
shall be at the same level and preferably at the 
plinth or floor level. The pillars shall be of size 
not less than 30 cm square and shall be bedded 
sufficiently deep into ground so that they are not 
easily disturbed. 

8.4 Site Bench Mark* 

Before commencing building operation, permanent 
bench marks located at convenient points on the 
site and preferable linked with G. T. S. Bench 
Marks, shall be put up so as to facilitate accurate 
setting out of height from a fixed datum. 

8.5 The judicious use of storey rods may ensure 
accuracy in setting out and facility for checking 
the work as it proceeds. 

9 SCAFFOLDING 

9.1 Single scaffolding shall not be used on im- 
portant works, since subsequent filling up of the 
putlog holes and rendering of their surface would 
give an unsightly appearance. Another disadvant- 
age with single scaffolding is that workmen are 
apt to support them on window and similar 
openings, thereby spoiling the frames and 
shutters. 

9.1,1 Where single scaffolding is adopted, the 

C lacing of the poles, which are to rest on the 
rickv Of k under construction, shall be so adjusted 
as to affect only one of the headers at the point of 
support in the various courses. 

9.2 Scaffolding shall be designed to withstand all 
the dead, live and impact loads which are likely 
to come on them. They shall also be so designed 
as to ensure the safety of the workmen using them 

in all respects to the require- 

levant building regulations on 

welfare and also the local build- 



and shall confoi 
ments of the r 
safety, health an 
ing bye-laws. 



10 SOAKING OF BRICKS 

10.1 Bricks shall be soaked in water before use for 
a period that is sufficient for the water to just 



17 



IS 2212 1 1991 



penetrate the whole depth of the bricks ( see 
Notes ). Wetting the bricks assists in removing the 
the dirt» sand and dust from them. Further, it 
prevents the suction of water from the wet mortar, 
as otherwise the mortar is likely to dry out soon 
and crumble before attaining any strength. The 
bricks shall not be too wet at the time of use, as 
they are likely to slip on the mortar bed and there 
will be difficulty in ensuring plumbness of the 
wall. Moreover, proper adhesion of bricks to 
mortar will not be possible if the bricks are too 
wet. 

NOTES 

1 The period of soaking may be eaiily found at site by 
a field test in which the bricki are soaked in water for 
different periods and then broken to find the extent of 
water penetration. The least period that corresponds to 
complete soaking will be the one to be allowed for in 
the construction work. 

2 If the bricks are soaked for the required time in water 
that is frequently changed, the soluble salts in the brick 
will be leached out, and subsequent efflorescence will 
be reduced. 

10.2 When bricks are soaked they shall be remo- 
ved from the tank sufficiently early so that at the 
time of laying they are skin-dry. Such soaked 
bricks shall be stacked on a clean place, where 
they are not again spoiled by dirt, earth, etc. 

11 LAYING OF BRICKWORK 

11.1 General 

11.1.1 Brick shall be laid on a full bed of mortar. 
When laying, the bricks shall be slightly pressed 
so that the mortar gets into all the pores of the 
brick surface to ensure proper adhesion. Gross 
joints and wall joints shall be properly flushed and 
packed with mortar so that no hollow spaces are 
left. Properly filled joints ensure maximum 
strength and resistance to penetration of moisture 
which takes place mainly through joints. 

In the case of thick walls ( two-brick thick and 
over ) » the joints shall be grouted at every course 
in addition to bedding and flushing with mortar. 

The course at the top of the plinth and sills at the 
top of the wall just below the roof slab or floor 
slab and at the top of the parapet, shall be laid 
with bricks on edge ( applicable only in the 
case of traditional bricks ); and at corners and 
deadends the bricks shall be properly radiated and 
keyed into position by using cut-bricks ( also 
known as 'punja* bricks or 'maruconas' ). Typical 
shape and arrangement of these bricks are shown 
in Fig. 15. 

11.1.2 Bricks with 20 mm deep frog shall be used 
frog-down. Bricks with 10 mm deep frog shall be 
used either frog-up or frog-down. 



11.1.3 The courses shall be aligned and care shall 
be taken to keep the perpends. 

11.1.4 The brickwork shall be built in uniform 
layers; corners and other advanced work shall be 
racked back. No part of a wall during its construc- 
tion shall rise more than one metre above the 
general construction level, to avoid unequal settle- 
ment and also improper jointing. 

11.1.5 The face joints shall be finished either by 
jointing or by pointing as specified, in accordance 
with 6.5. 




Fig. 15 A Typical Arrangement of Cut- 
Bricks in a Corner 

11.1.6 Toothing may be done where future 
extention is contemplated but shall not be used as 
an alternative to racking back. 

11.2 Walls 



11.2.1 All quoins shall be accurately constructed 
and the height of the courses checked with storey 
rods as the work proceeds. In general, quoin- 
bricks shall be headers and stretchers in alternate 
courses, the bond being established by placing a 
quoin closer next to the queen header. 

11.2.2 Acute and obtuse quoins shall be bonded, 
where practicable, in the same way as square 
quoins. Obtuse quoins shall be formed with 
squints showing a three-quarter brick on one face 
and a quarter brick on the other. 

11.3 Plasters 

These shall be Set out as to avoid broken bond. 

11.4 Openings 

11.4.1 The depth of reveals and rebates shall, 
where practicable, conform to standard brick sizes 
in order to avoid cutting of bricks and thereby 
weakening the work. 

11.4.2 The arrangement of bond at quoins at 
jambs of openings shall be symmetrical. 



1* 



IS 2212 t 1991 



11.5 Partition! 

For half-brick partitions to be keyed into main 
walls, indents shall be left in the latter. 

11.6 Arches 

Arches shall be turned with ordinary bricks over 
timber centres, generally in rings of half-brick 
length. For face work, the bricks shall be either 
specially manufactured bricks or ordinary bricks 
cut and rubbed to shape in order to obtain uniform 
radial joints. 

11.6*1 Flat arches may be used for the sake of 
appearance, but for purposes of carrying loads 
of the wall above they shall be used in conjunc- 
tion with relieving arches, or with lintels placed 
behind. 

11.6.2 In the construction of a fiat arch, though 
the extrados is perfectly level, the intrados is given 
a slight camber to allow for any slight settlement 
or to correct the apparent sagging of a horizontal 
line, the usual allowance being about 1 mm rise 
at the centre for every 100 mm of span. 

11.6.3 Large arches in masonry shall be construc- 
ted in accordance with IS 2118 : 1980. 

11.7 Fixing of Frame* 

11.7.1 Where door or window frames of timber 
are fixed in the openings, the fixing shall be done 
generally with hold-fasts of adequate size and 
strength securely embedded in the brickwork or 
in chases later filled up by cement mortar or con- 
crete. Hold-fasts shall be fixed in the brickwork 
for a sufficient length and then turned up at end 
into a cross joint, thus avoiding indiscriminate 
cutting of bricks Iron hold-fasts shall be given a 
protective coat of bitumen to avoid rusting. Wood- 
work faces in contact with brickwork shall be 
treated with wood preservative to prevent attack 
from insects and termites. 

11.7.2 Fixing of steel doors and windows shall be 
•done in accordance with IS 1081 : 1960. 

11.7.3 Fixing of timber doors and windows shall 
be done in accordance With IS 4913:; 1968. 

11.7.4 The frames snail preferably be fixed simul- 
taneously as the masonry work proceeds, as, this 
•construction will ensure proper bond without gaps 
between the masonry and the frames. 

11.8 Reinforced Brickwork 

11.8.1 Reinforcement in half-brick partition walls 
may be in the form of mild steel flats or hoop iron, 
-expanded mesh, or mild steel bars or fabric. These 
are generally used in every third or fourth courses 
of the brickwork They shall be securely anchored 
-at their ends where the partitions bond. 



11.8.2 In the cast of round bars used as reinforce- 
ment, the diameter shall not exceed 8 mm. Fiat 
bars and similar reinforcement shall not have a 
thickness exceeding 8 mm. 

11.8.3 The thickness of reinforced brick wall shall 
be not less than 100 mm. 

11.8.4 The crushing strength of the bricks used in 
reinforced brick masonry shall be not less than 

7*5 N|mm». 

11.8.5 The mortar used for reinforced brickwork 
shall generally be rich, dense, cement mortar of 
mix about 1 : 4. Lime mortars shall not be used. 

11.8*6 The inlaid steel reinforcement shall be 
completely embedded in mortar. Overlaps in the 
reinforcement, if any, shall not be less than 
300 mm. 

11.8.6.1 The mortar covering in the direction of 
joints shall be not less than 15 mm. 

11.8.6.2 The mortar interposed between the rein- 
forcement bars and the brick shall be not less than 
5 mm thick. 

11.8.7 In the case where the reinforcements cross 
inside a joint, the diameter of the reinforcement 
shall not exceed 5 mm, unless specially shaped 
bricks are used to permit larger reinforcement. 

11.9 Protection Against Damage 

11.9.1 Care shall be taken during construction 
that edges of jambs, sills, heads, etc, are not 
damaged. 

11.9.2 In inclement weather, newly built work 
shall be covered with gunny bags or tarpaulin 
so as to prevent the mortar from being washed 
away. 

11.10 Curing 

In hot and dry weather, the mortar is likely to 
dry up before it has attained its final set and may 
crumble. This shall be prevented by keeping the 
brickwork constantly wet for at least seven days, 
except in the case of brickwork with mud mortar 
for which no such curing is required. 

11.11 Provision for Service Installations 

To facilitate taking service lines later without 
inordinate cutting of completed work, sleeves and 
chases shall be provided during the construction 
itself. Such sleeves shall slope down outwards in 
external walls so that their surface cannot form 
channels for tjie easy passage of water inside. 

11.12 Cavity Walls 

11.12.1 As the main object of providing a conti- 
nuous cavity in an external wall is to prevent rain 
penetrating to the. inner face, care shall be 



19 



IS2212t 1991 



exercised during construction that the cavity is 
continuous and free from obstruction. As far as 
possible, mortar droppings shall be prevented from 
falling down the cavity by the use of laths or by 
haybands which shall be drawn up the cavity as 
the work proceeds. Any mortar which may 
unavoidably fall on the wall-ties be removed daily 
and temporary openings shall be provided to 
permit the daily removal of mortar droppings from 
the bottom of the cavity. 

11.12*2 Special precautions as laid down in 
IS 1649 : 1962 shall be taken in building flues 
adjacent to cavities. 

11.12J Bond 

In building hollow walls of half-brick thickness, 
only stretcher bond shall be used, unless purpose- 
made snap headers are available. When header 
bricks are cut and used, they are either likely to 
protrude into the cavity and form ledges for mor- 
tar droppings to collect or they may be so short as 
to weaken the structure. 

11.12.4 The outer and inner leaves shall be tied 
by means of wall ties. The wall ties shall prefera- 
bly be bedded with a slight fall towards the 
exterior part of the wall. 

11.12.5 At the base of the cavity wall, the founda- 
tions and basement shall be solidly constructed up 
to 300 mm above the ground level. The air cavity 
shall begin not less than 200 mm below the upper 
floor surface of the ground floor and the cavity 
shall be continued without interruption up to the 
roof. 

11.12.6 Ventilation 

In order to keep the. cavity dry, air slots shall be 
provided above the ground floor level and below 
the eave level of the roof to extent of 500 mm 1 
area of vents to every 20 m» area of the wall. 

11.12*7 The following precautions shall be obser- 
ved at the top of the cavity: 

a) Parapets — If the top of a hollow wall ends 
with a parapet, the cavity shall be carried 
up to the full height of the wall or stopped 
at the roof-flashing level. 

b) Eaves — If a roof projects oyer the top 
of the wall, the cavity shall be closed at 
the top. 

c) Patty Walls — In a hollow party wall, the 
top of a cavity shall be closed just above 
the uppermost ceiling level and the courses 
over shall be continued in solid brickwork. 
A sound-insulating material shall be inter- 
posed between the hollow wall and the 
solid brickwork. 

11.12.8 At the points where the two leaves of the 
hollow wall come into contact ( for example, at 



windows and doors ), they shall be separated by 
a water-tight membrane. 

11.12.8.1 Above the lintels of doors and windows, 
damp-proof membrane shall be inserted slopping 
downwards and outwards. 

11.12.8.2 At solid jambs a vertical damp-proof 
course shall be inserted between the outer and 
inner parts of the wall. 

12 INSPECTION 

12.1 General 

The object of inspection of brick masonry work is- 
to ensure its satisfactory performance and also to- 
ascertain whether all the recommended practice 
of workmanship is adopted at every stage. As the 
correct strength of masonry cannot be ascertain- 
ed without destruction, a close supervision during 
the course of construction is necessary to ensure 
satisfactory performance. The strength of brick- 
work depends on the strength of individual brick,. 
strength of mortar, bond and workmanship. 

12.2 Inspection of Materials 

In case of large works, samples of bricks, sands, 
surkhi, lime, cement, etc, which goto form the 
brickwork, shall be periodically tested in a labora- 
tory to make sure that they conform to the 
requirements stated in 5. Simple field tests may 
suffice in the case of small works. 

12.3 Inspection of Workmanship 

A close supervision while the work is in progress 
will ensure a better quality work with the materials 
available for use. The following shall be observed 
at the time of inspection: 

a) All loose materials, dirt and set lumps of 
mortar which may be lying over the surface 
over which brickwork is to be freshly star- 
ted, shall be removed with a wire brush. 

b) All the bricks shall be thoroughly soaked in 
clean water immediately before use. 

c) The surface over which the brickwork is to 
be started shall be slightly wetted. 

d) The first course itself shall be made hori- 
zontal by providing enough mortar in the 
bed joint to fill up any undulations in the 
bed course. 

e) Plastic mortar results in thorough bedding 
of the brick and more complete filling of 
the joints which ensure greater strength. 
Care shall be taken to see that the required 
quantity of water is added to the mortar 
at the mixing platform itself and not over 
the courses. 



20 



IS 2212 1 1991 



f) All the joints shall, as far as possible, be 
thin and the specifications mentioned 
in 6.4 in this regard shall be strictly adhe- 
red to. 

g) Care shall be taken to see that there is no 
through joints and ihe lap is not less than 
half the width of the brick, and that all 
the vertical joints are properly filled with 
mortar. 

h) The vertically of the walls and horizon- 
tality of the courses shall be checked very 
often with plumb bob and spirit level 
respectively, 

j) No portion of the work shall be left more 
than 1 m lower than the other. Where the 
masonry of one part has to be delayed the 
work shall be 'raked back' suitably at an 
angle not exceeding 45° according to bond 
and not toothed. 

k) Where plastering is required to be done all 
the vertical as well as horizontal joints shall 
be raked to a depth of about 10 mm while 
the mortar is wet, and this will ensure 
satisfactory adhesion between the plaster 
and brickwork, and 

m) Care shall be taken to ensure that the brick 
work is kept wet for seven days commenc- 
ing from 24 hours after the course is laid. 

13 MAINTENANCE 

13.1 Where proper materials and workmanship 
are used, brickwork will need little maintenance. 
If, however, defects occur, they may be due to the 
following causes: 

a) Sulphate attack on mortars and renderings, 

b) Use of unsound materials, 

c) Corrosion of embedded iron or steel, 

d) Crystallization of salts from the bricks, and 

e) Defects due to shrinkage on drying. 

13.2 Sulphate Attack on Mortar and Render- 
ing 

13.2.1 Sulphates present in brickwork react in the 
presence of water with alumina contents of the 
cement and hydraulic limes in the mortar and 
rendering, forming other salts with considerable 
increase in volume, and consequently chip and 
spall the bricks, produce cracks in the joints and 
renderings, and disintegrate the mortar. Water is, 
therefore, essential for this defect, and it may 
arise in exposed situations in brickwork. Parapets, 
boundary walls, chimney walls, etc, shall be built 
with bricks of low sulphate content. Similarly, 
brickwork in situations where wet conditions are to 
be expected, such as below damp-proof course, in 
manholes, in retaining walls, etc, shall also be 



built of bricks with low sulphate content. Brick- 
work exposed to sea spray shall be made with 
dense bricks and cement mortar. Brickwork in 
exposed situations shall not be given a rich cement 
rendering ( say richer than 1 ; 4 cement : sand 
mix ) as the latter, due to shrinkage cracks, may 
admit penetration of water into the body of the 
wall, and at the same time, prevent its ready 
evaporation due to its close texture. 

13.2.2 Sulphate attacks in their initial stages may 
be remedied by rectifying the possible sources of 
water seepage into the body of brickwork and by 
scraping the affected mortar and rejointing and 
rendering. In more advanced stages, the only 
remedy is to pull down the affected parts and 
reconstruct them. 

13.2.3 The primary precaution to be taken to 
prevent sulphate attacks is to adopt constructional 
details and choose materials that will ensure 
complete preventation of entry of water into the 
brickwork. 

Some important constructional details to avoid 
wet conditions are stated below: 

a) Damp-proof courses shall be provided under 
all jointed members covering the horizontal 
or sloping faces of brickwork including 
copings, sills, chimney caps. 

b) All projecting features formed with joined 
units, such a cornices and string courses, 
shall be covered with properly designed 
flashings, and where necessary, cover flash- 
ings shall be provided at the wall face. 
Cement fillets and cement renderings used 
as a protection to horizontal surfaces are 
unlikely to be satisfactory; both are liable 
to develop shrinkage cracks which let in 
water. 

c) Parapet walls shall not be sealed on both 
faces by impervious rendering; this reduces 
the rate of evaporation and may ultimately 
result in a wet-condition of the brickwork. 

d) On walls faced with external renderings, 
all damp-proof courses shall extend through 
the facing and turn down to form protec- 
tective drips. 

e) Where flashings are used above roof level 
in conjunction with damp-proof courses, 
they shall be inserted immediately below 
the damp-proof courses. 

f ) Cavity walls shall be effectively drained by 
weep holes above all damp-proof courses 
that bridge the cavity. 

g) The use of dense stones or bricks as a facing 
to porous brickwork in solid walls may lead 
to prolonged dampness of the wall. Water 
entering through the shrinkage cracks may 



21 



IS 2212: 1991 



not evaporate sufficiently rapidly through 
the dense facing. 

13.3 Use of Unsound Materials 

13.3.1 Bricks containing burnt noduless of quick- 
lime, and mortar containing unslaked particles of 
lime are often responsible for cracks in bricks, and 
for pittings displacement cracks, etc, in mortars; 
when coming in contact with water, the quick- 
lime gets hydrated and expands in volume and 
causes such defects* 

13.3.2 The remedy lies in ensuring that all lime 
is properly slaked before mixing into mortar, and 
in choosing bricks burnt from the proper soil. 
Constructional details designed for excluding 
moisture from such walls ( see 13.2 ) will also stop 
this trouble. 

13.4 Corrosion of Embedded Iron and Steel 

Iron and steel corrode in contact with atmospheric 
moisture, where such moisture is laden with acids 
sulphates and chloride salts in solution. In coastal 
areas such corrosion occurs rapidly. Iron embed- 
ded in brickwork is corroded for the same reason 
when such salts are released in solution from the 
bricks themselves when damp. While undergoing 
corrosion, the iron expands considerably and 
tends to disrupt the brickwork. Prevention of such 
corrosion may be achieved by giving an encase- 
ment of 15 to 25 mm of dense cement mortar (1:4 
mix or richer) around all embedded steel sections. 
Iron and steel members partially embedded in 
brickwork tend to corrode at the point of their 
entry into the brickwork and to prevent this, they 
shall be given a bituminous protective coating at 
that place. 

13.5 Crystallisation of Salts 

13.5.1 When bricks containing soluble salts are 
used in construction, these salts are dissolved out, 
if water passes into the brickwork and are deposi- 
ted in the form of fine crystals on the face of the 
brickwork. This is known as efflorescence. 

13.5.2 Efflorescence will be a common phenome- 
non with new construction since the water used in 
the construction invariably leaves the salts dissol- 
ved from the brickwork on the face. When the 
structure dries up, this efflorescence shall be scrub- 
bed out dry with brushes. They shall not be 
washed as the solution will again be absorbed 
into the brickwork. Cleaning with acids shall not 
be done as new salts are formed thereby. 

NOTE — In some cases, when the efflorescence is 
composed mainly of lime and the lime has had time to 
carbonate into almost insoluble chalk, the surface may 
be wetted to prevent undue absorption and then scrub- 
bed down with a solution of one part of commercial 
hydrochloric ( muriatic ) acid in 20 parts of water and 
subsequently washed down to remove all traces of acid, 
care having been taken previously to protect any metal 
or other work likely to be damaged by the acid. 



13.5.3 Continued efflorescence would indicate 
that water from leaks or similar sources is finding 
its way into the brickwork through previous- 
channels. In these cases, entry of water shall be 
located and stopped. 

13.5.4 Some of the salts, like magnesium sulphate 
have a disintegration effect on the brick face, and 
cause it to crumble to dust. Chemical analysis of 
the surface scrapings will indicate the nature of 
the salts and if they are of the harmful type 
special care shall be taken to seal off the entry of 
water into the brickwork. 

13.6 Defects Dae to Shrinkage or Drying 

Brickwork generally swells with absorption of 
water and when the water evaporates, it shrinks 
and in so doing develops vertical cracks, and 
when the mortar of the brickwork is lean, the 
cracks are distributed over a large nt^mber of 
joints so that they are not significantly visible. 
However, when the mortar is rich, the resulting 
cracks are few but wider, occurring at the weakest 
point in the brick or mortar. These cracks have 
no adverse effect on the structural strength of the 
work and may be easily rectified. These do not 
recur after the first season of drying out provided 
the walls are generally water-tight. 

14 REP AIRING BRICK WORK 

14.1 Defects and cracking in brickwork may be^ 
due to one or several causes mentioned in 
clause 13.1 and to execute effective repairs, it is 
necessary to know the cause of damage. The effect 
of defect in a wall must be judged in relation to 
the building as a whole and the general soundness 
of its construction and the particular function of 
the wall is called upon to serve. The nature of 
repairs mainly depends on whether it is structural 
damage or surface cracking only. At times even 
wide cracks may not seriously affect the stability 
of the structure provided the brickwork is not 
distorted or is not much out of plumb. 

14.2 Before deciding the course of treatment to- 
be adopted to following factors shall be conside- 
red: 

a) The type of foundation on which the wall 
is constructed; 

b) The position and bonding of cross walls- 
and other connecting structural members; 

c) Whether the wall is true to plumb; 

d) Whether floors, roofs, upper walls, etc, are 
liable to exert thrust or restraint to further 
movement; and 

e) The aesthetic effect of the crack over the- 
building as a whole. 



22 



IS 2212 V 1991 



14.3 Treatment of Structural Damage 

14.3.1 Where walls become unsafe due to diffe- 
rential movements resulting from seasonal fluctua- 
tions in the moisture content of subsoil or due to 
the presence of rilled materials below the 
foundations, the work may require special measure 
such as providing reinforced concrete band at 
plinth level, lintel level, top level, etc, and 
lowering ground-water table. 

14.3.2 For damages other than mentioned 
in 14.3.1 one of the following treatments may be 
adopted: 



o 



b) 



c) 



To provide tie rods passing through the 
floor or at roof level anchoring the damag- 
ed wall to another wall or structural 
member that is sound or has tendency to 
move in the opposite direction. 

To build buttresses, keyed into the damag- 
ed wall so as to give thrust against the 
wall in the required direction. It shall be 
ensured that the buttresses rest on firm soil 
without giving way to settlements or move- 
ments. 

In case the wall is noticed to be out of 
plumb, the damaged or bulged portion of 
the wall shall be dismantled and rebuilt 
with mortar of the same proportion as the 
adjoining portion. 

14.3.3 Treatment of Cracks Across Walls 

14.3.3.1 These cracks are more or less diagonal 
cracks and either follow the vertical and horizon- 
tal joints alternately or pass straight down through 
alternate vertical joints and the intervening bricks 
and mortar beds. In these cases one of the follow- 
ing methods may be adopted: 

a) If the cracks are of such nature that they 
are likely to encourage the penetration of 
rain if they are not repaired, it is necessary 
to cut out and replace the cracked bricks. 

b) If the cracks are wide, the two portions can 
be stitched by inserting bond stone or pre- 
cast reinforced concrete blocks at suitable 
intervals. The cracks shall then be grouted. 
Sufficient care has to be taken in preparing 
the precast concrete blocks so that the 



patched surface will match with the sur- 
rounding surface. In repairing cracks with 
mortar it is important to secure satisfactory 
adhesion between the masonry of the exis- 
ting work and the new bricks and also not 
to use too strong a mortar mix Otherwise 
shrinkage of the new rich mortar may 
cause a fresh crack to develop. To promote 
adhesion, the brickwork shall be wetted 
before the mortar is rilled in. 

14.3.3.2 If a number of cracks have appeared in 
a single wall and the cracks cross each other these 
cracks can not be effectively repaired. The walls 
in such cases have no strength and it is advisable to 
dismantle the entire wall and reconstruct the same, 
supporting the structure above in a suitable 
manner. 

In case the diagonal cracks have occurred in a 
localised place of the wall, the brickwork at the 
damaged place and around shall be dismantled 
and rebuilt. While dismantling such portions, care 
shall be taken to relieve the load on the wall by 
providing props at suitable places. The props or 
supports for the structure above the work under 
repair shall not be removed till the rebuilt maso- 
nry has attained enough strength. 

14.3.3.3 Where the cracks are likely to continue 
to widen for sometime after initial development 
( such as in the case of cracks due to ground 
movement in shrinkable clay sub-soil ) it would 
be advisable not to repair the cracks with mortar. 
If filling is found necessary to prevent the pene- 
tration of moisture or rain, an oil based mastic 
shall be applied by caulking or by a gun. 

14.3.3.4 Surface cracks 

Where the mortar in the joints has become dama- 
ged without dislocating the brickwork, which may 
be due to initial usage of poor mortar, improper 
filling or action of frost or fire or unknown ele- 
ments of nature, the joints shall be raked 
thoroughly to a depth of at least 20 mm and the 
raked joints caulked with mortar and the brick- 
work pointed. Care shall be taken to avoid the 
usage of a strong mortar for caulking purposes. 
The patch work shall be properly cured 
( see 11.10 ). 



23 



18 2212 s 1991 



ANNEX A 
( Clause 2 ) 

LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 



IS No. TUU 

226 : 1975 Structural steel ( standard quality ) 
(fifth revision ) 

269 : 1976 Ordinary and low heat Portland 
cement ( third revision ) 

383 : 1970 Coarse and fine aggregates from 

natural sources for concrete ( second 

revision ) 

405 Lead sheet and strip : Part II For 

( Part 2 ) : other than chemical purposes 

1977 ( second revision ) 

412 : 1975 Expanded metal steel sheets for 
general purposes ( second revision ) 

432 Mild steel and medium tensile steel 

( Part 1 ) : bars and hard drawn steel wire for 

1982 concrete reinforcement : Part 1 

Mild steel and medium tensile 

steel bars ( third revision ) 

432 Mild steel and medium tensile steel 

(Part 2 ) : bars and hard drawn steel wire for 

1982 concrete reinforcement : Part 2 

Hard drawn steel wire ( third 

revision ) 

455 : 1976 Portland slag cement ( third revision ) 

456 : 1978 Code of practice for plain and rein- 

forced concrete ( third revision ) 

712 : 1984 Building limes ( third revision ) 
1077 : 1991 Common burnt clay building bricks 

(fifth revision ) 

1080 : 1985 Code of practice for design and 

construction of shallow foundations 
in soils ( other than raft, ring and 
shell ) ( second revision ) 

1081 : 1960 Code of practice for fixing and 

glazing of metal ( steel and alu- 
minium doors, windows and 
ventilators ) 

1212 : 1978 Methods for testing tar and bitu- 
minous materials : Determination 
of loss on heating (first revision ) 

! 322 : 1982 Bitumen felts for water-proofing and 
damp-proofing ( third revision ) 

1344:1981 Calcined clay pozzolana (second 
revision ) 

1489 : 1976 Portland-pozzolana cement ( second 
revision ) 

1566 : 1982 Hard-drawn steel wire fabric for 
concrete reinforcement ( second 
revision ) 



IS No. Title 

1580 : 1969 Bitumen compounds for water* 
proofing and caulking purposes 
(first revision ) 

1630 : 1984 Mason's tools for plaster work and 
pointing work (first revision ) 

1635 : 1975 Code of practice for field slaking of 
building lime and preparation of 
putty (fast revision ) - 

1642 : 1988 Code of practice for fire safety of 
buildings ( general ) : Materials 
and details of construction (first 
revision ) 

1649 : 1962 Code of practice design and cons- 
truction of flues and chimneys for 
domestic heating appliances (first 
revision ) 

1904 : 1986 Code of practice for design and 
construction of foundations in soils: 
General requirement ( third revision ) 

1905 : 1987 Code of practice for structural 
use of unreinforced masonry ( third 
revision ) 

1950 : 1962 Code of practice for sound insula- 
tion of non-industrial buildings 

2115: 1980 Code of practice for flat-roof finish, 
mud phuska ( second revision ) 

2116: 1980 Sand for masonry mortars (first 
revision ) 

2118 : 1980 Code of practice for construction of 
jack-arch type of building floor or 
roof (first revision ) 

2180 : 1988 Heavy duty burnt clay building 
bricks ( third revision ) 

2250 : 1981 Code of practice for preparation 
and use of masonry mortars (first 
revision ) 

3466 : 1988 Masonry cement ( second revision ) 

3792: 1978 Guide for heat insulation of non- 
industrial buildings (first revision ) 

3812 : 1981 Fly ash for use as pozzolana and 
admixture (first revision ) 

4098 : 1983 Lime-pozzolana mixture ( first 
revision ) 

4913 : 1968 Code of practice for selection ins- 
tallation and maintenance of 
timber doors and windows 

8041 : 1978 Rapid hardening Portland cement 

(first revision ) 
8043 : 1978 Hydrophobic Portland cement (first 

revision ) 



24 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1 986 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does hot preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue 
of 'BIS Handbook' and 'Standards : Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. CED 1 3 ( 4782 ). 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavah, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10002 Telegrams: Manaksanstha 

Telephones : 323 01 31, 323 94 02, 323 33 75 ( Common to 

all offices ) 

Regional Offices: Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 323 76 17 

NEW DELHI 110002 \ 323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola f 337 84 99, 337 85 61 

CALCUTTA 700054 \ 337 86 26, 337 86 62 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 f 60 38 43 

1 60 20 25 



Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 6001 13 J 235 02 16, 235 04 42 

[ 235 15 19,235 23 15 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) J 832 92 95, 832 78 58 

MUMBAI 400093 \ 832 78 91, 832 78 92 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 

COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. 
KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at New India Printing Press, Khurja, India 



