**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 3288-1 (1986) : Glossary of Terms Relating to Copper and 
Copper Alloys, Part 1: Materials [MTD 8: Copper and Copper 
Alloys] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 3268 ( Part 1 ) - 1386 

( Reaffirmed 2006 ) 

Indian Standard 

GLOSSARY OF TERMS 
RELATING TO COPPER AND COPPER ALLOYS 

FART 1 MATERLAL5 

( Third Revision ) 



UDG 001-4 :(>G9-3 



© alight 1997 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK. bHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MAitG 

NEW DELHI WWffl 

Gr 2 AttgUii 1987 



IS : 3288 ( Part 1 ) - 1986 

Indian Standard 

GLOSSARY OF TERMS 
RELATING TO COPPER AND COPPER ALLOYS 

PART 1 MATERIALS 

( Third Revision ) 



Copper and Copper Alloys Sectional Committee, SMDC 1 1 

Chairman Representing 

Db L, R. Vaidyanath Indian Copper Development Centre, Calcutta 

Members 

Shbi D. De Sarkar ( Alternate to 
Dr L, R, Vaidyanath ) 
Shri Dev Kumar Agoabwai, Bralco Metal Industries Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shri Raj Kumar Aggarwal ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. T. Bajaj Kamani Tubes Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi K. L. Babui National Test House, Calcutta 

Shbi H. P. Dubey ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. Neoesh Bhatt Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore 

Shbi A. R. Sukumabah ( Alternate ) 
Shbi C. D. Bhattachaeya Hindustan Cables Ltd, Burdwan 

Shbi M. Jha { Alternate ) 
Shbi Balkbishna Binani Rashtriya Metal Industries Ltd, Bombay 

Db V. S. Patkab ( Alternate ) 
Prof A. D. Bohba Alcobex Metal (P) Ltd, Jodhpur 

Shri Kuldekp Dhinora ( Alternate) 
Shbi M. K. Choudhuby Bengal Ingot Co Ltd Calcutta 

Shbi P. R. Dhab Indian Standard Metal Go Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi N. R. Maniar ( Alternate ) 
Shbi B. Dutta Directorate General of Ordnance Factories, 

Calcutta 

Shbi S, K. Ghosh ( Alternate ) 
Shbi H. N. Gupta Ministry of Finance 

Shbi A. V. Habne Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd 

Shbi P. V. Dixit ( Alternate I ) 

Shbi M. N. Chandraskkhabiah {Alternate II ) 
Shri D. P.Jain Saru Smelting Pvt Ltd, Meerut 

Shri Davinder Kumar Taik Aggarwal Metal Works Pvt Ltd, Rewari 

Shbi Rajiv Jain ( Alternate) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1987 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 3288 ( Part 1 ) - 1986 

( Continued /rorn page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shki R. p. Kesan KMA Ltd, Bombay 

Shri a. H. Sabhachandani [Alternate) 
Shki S. K. Khandekab Vanaz Engineers (Pvt) Ltd, Pune 

Sbbi P.K. D, Lee Ministry of Finance 

Shbi S. Bagchi { Alternate ) 
Shri A. K. Mitra Neo Pipes & Tubes Co Ltd, Calcutta 

Du P. R. MuKHERJBE INCAB Industries Ltd, Jamshedpur 

SitRi Tiiii.oK Singh {Alternate) 
Shri G. R. K. Mubthy Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Shri I. N. Bhatia { Alternate ) 
Shri S. K. Pandey Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, New 

Delhi 
Shbi H. S. Ramachandra Hindustan Machine Tools Ltd, Bangalore 

Shbi A. Shantharam ( Alternate I ) 

Shki V. N. Venkatesan ( Alternate 11 ) 
Shri T. Ramasxtbbamanian Directorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 

Shr] T. R. Mohan Rao ( Alternate ) 
Shbi P. S. Ramaswamy Bhandary Metallurgical Corporation Ltd, Bombay 

Shri M. K. Rao Indian Non-Ferrous Metals Manufacturer* s 

Association. Bombay 
Shbi P. B. Rao Directorate of Warships Projects (Navy), New 

Delhi 

Shri K. R. Naib ( Alternate ) 
Shbi D. K. Sbhqai. Leader Engineering Works, Jalandhar 

Additional Director (Met), Ministry of Railways 
M & G Directorate RDSO, 

LUCKNOW 

Db p. D. Sharma Hindustan Copper Ltd^ Calcutta 

Shri S. C. Sxvabamkrishnan National Metallurgical Laboratory ( CSIR ), 

Jamshedpur 
ShriJ. Sridhaban Ministry of Steel and Mines 

Shbi P. Sbibam Rapsri Engineering Industries Pvt Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri N. S. Suuana Multimeials Ltd, Kota 

Shbi N. G. RamaebisHNan ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. R. Taoore Ministry of Defence (DGI) 

Shri P. K. L. P. Ntmankar ( Alternate ) 
Shbi S. S. Vaidyanathak J. B. Metal Industries Ltd, Bombay 

Shri Y. P. Vu Minerals & Metals Trading Corporation of India 

Ltd, New Delhi 
Shri K. DHAKSHiNAMtrRTHY ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. Mukhbrji, Director General, BIS ( Ex-officio Member) 

Director ( Struc & Met) 

Secretary 

ShbtJagmohan Singh 

Deputy Director ( Metals ), BIS 



IS : 3288 ( Part 1 ) - 1986 

Indian Standard 

GLOSSARY OF TERMS 
RELATING TO COPPER AND COPPER ALLOYS 

PART 1 MATERIALS 

( Third Revision ) 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part 1 ) ( Third Revision ) was adopted by 
the Indian Standards Institution on 30 October 1986, after the draft 
finalized by the Copper and Copper Alloys Sectional Committee had 
been approved by the Structural and Metals Division Council. 

0.2 IS : 3288 ( Part 1 ) covering terms for cast form and wrought form 
(main) was first published in 1965 and subsequently revised in 1973 
and 1981. While reviewing the standard, the Sectional Committee 
decided to revise Part 1 and issue 7 more parts for making glossary 
more comprehensive by modifying the definition of several terms and 
by including many more terms commonly used in copper industry. 
The parts are: 

Part 1 Materials {third revision) 

Part 2 Unwrought and cast form 

Part 3 Wrought form 

Part 4 Processing 

Part 5 Heat treatment 

Part 6 Finishes 

Part 7 Dimensional surfaces and structural characteristics 

Part 8 Packing 

0.3 This standard is intended mainly to cover technical definitions of 
terms relating to copper and copper alloys, and it does not necessarily 
include all the legal meanings of the terms. It is hoped that this 
standard will help in establishing a generally recognized usage for 
various terms encountered in the copper industry and eliminate any 



IS : 3288 ( Part 1 ) - 1986 

confusion which may sometimes arise due to individual interpretation 
of terms used in the industry. 

0.4 In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived 
from the following: 

a) ISO 197 — Copper and copper alloys — Terms and definitions 

ISO 197/1-1983 —Part 1 Material 

ISO 197/2-1983 — Part 2 Unwrought products ( Refinery 
shapes ) 

ISO 197/3-1983 — Part 3 Wrought products 

ISO 197/4-1983 — Part 4 Castings 

ISO 197/5-1980 — Part 5 Methods of processing and treatment 

Issued by the International Organization for Standardization 
( ISO ). 

b) BS 1420 : 1965 Glossary of terms applicable to wrought 
products in copper, zinc and their alloys, issued by the British 
Standards Institution, London. 



1, SCOPE 

!•! This standard (Part 1 ) defines terms used for material in the field 
of copper and copper alloys. 

2, GENERAL TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 

2.1 Alloy — A metallic substance consisting of the basic element 
( the elem.ent predom.inating by mass) and alloying elements. 

2.2 Alloying Element — Metallic or non-metallic elements added to 
or retained in the basic metal for the purpose of giving that metal 
certain special properties. 

2.3 Impurity — Metallic or non-metallic elements present but which 
are not intentionally added to or retained by a metal. 

2.4 Wrought Alloy — An alloy primarily intended for the production 
of wrought products by hot and/or cold plastic deformation. 

2.5 Casting Alloy — An alloy primarily intended for the production 
of castings. 

2.6 Master Alloy — An alloy intended only for addition to a melt to 
adjust composition. 

4 



IS : 3288 ( Part 1 ) - 1986 

2.7 Heat-treatable Alloy — An alloy capable of being changed in its 
properties by suitable thermal treatment. 

2.8 Non Heat-treatable Alloy — An alloy strengthened by cold 
working only and incapable of being substantially strengthened by 
thermal treatment. 

3. SPECIFIC TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 

3.1 Unrefined Copper 

3.1.1 Copper Matte — An intermediate product consisting mainly of 
ferrous and cuprous sulphides, which is oxidized in convertors to 
produce metallic copper, usually termed blister copper. 

3.1.2 Black Copper — An impure form of copper produced by smelting 
impure copper scrap and/or oxidized copper ores, usually in a shaft 
furnace. 

3.1.3 Blister Copper — An impure form of copper produced by blowing 
air through molten copper matte. During the conversion process 
sulphur, iron and other impurities are oxidized. The copper content 
is normally above 96 percent. 

3.1.4 Cement Copper — An impure, finely divided mixture of copper 
and copper oxide obtained by precipitation of copper usually by iron 
( cementation ) from aquous solution of copper compounds. The copper 
content, dry basis, varies Mndely, usually 50 percent and above, 

3.2 Types of Copper 

3.2.1 Oxygen-Free Copper — Copper containing less than 10 ppm 
oxygen. 

3.2.2 Tough Pitch Copper — Copper containing less than 0*06 percent 
oxygen, either electrolytically or fire refined, cast in the form of 
refinery shapes, containing a controlled amount of oxygen for the 
purpose of obtaining a level set in the casting. By extension, 
the term is applicable to fabricators products made therefrom. 

3.2.3 Electrolytic Copper ( ETP ) — Copper, of any origin, refined by 
electrolytic deposition. Usually when this term is used alone, it refers 
to electrolytic tough pitch copper. This designation applies to the 
following. 

3.2.3.1 Cathodes, that are the direct products of refining operation. 



IS : 3288 ( Part 1 ) - 1986 

3.2.3.2 Electrodeposited copper, cast from melted cathodes into 
refinery shape, suitable for hot or cold working or both and by 
extension, fabricators products made therefrom. 

3.2.3.3 Electrodeposited copper, cast into ingot or ingot bar, 
suitable for remelting. 

3.2.4 Fire- Refined Copper — Copper of any origin or type, finished by 
furnace refining. Usually when the term 'fire refined copper* is used 
alone, it refers to fire-refined tough pitch copper. This designation 
applies to the following: 

a) Copper cast in the form of refinery shapes suitable for hot or 
cold working or both, and by extension, fabricators' products 
made therefrom (FRTP-1). 

b) Ingot or ingot bar suitable for remelting ( FRTP-2 ). 

3.2*5 Fire-RefiMed High Conductivity Copper ( FRHC ) — Copper which, in 
the annealed condition, has a minimum electrical conductivity 
of 100 percent of International Annealed Copper Standard ( lACS), 

3.2.6 Deoxidized Copper — Copper cast in form of refinery shapes, 
produced free from cuprous oxide through the use of deoxidizers. By 
extension, the term applies to fabricators' products made therefrom. 

3.2.6.1 Deoxidized Copper High Residual Phosphorus ( DHP ) — Copper 
deoxidized by phosphorous, usually residual in excess. It is not 
susceptible to hydrogen embrittlement but is of relatively low electrical 
conductivity due to the amount of phosphorus present. 

3.2.6.2, Deoxidized Copper Lower Residual Phosphorous ( DLP ) — Copper 
deoxidized by phosphorous, usually has residual in small quantity. It 
is not susceptible to hydrogen embrittlement and has electrical 
conductivity of 90 percent lACS. 

3.2.7 Arsenical Tough Pitch Copper ( ATP ) — Copper containing arsenic 
in amounts as agreed to between the supplier and the purchaser, and 
are produced tough pitch variety. 

3.2.B Phosphorus Deoxidized Arsenical Copper ( DP A ) — Copper deoxidized 
by phosphorus and containing arsenic in amounts as agreed to between 
the supplier and the purchaser. 

3.3 Method of Refining — The types of copper listed under 3.2 
originate fiom one or more of the following refining methods. 

3.3.1 Electrolytic Refining — A process to purify copper by electrolytic 
desposition using soluble anodes. 



IS : 3288 ( Part 1 ) - 1986 

3.3.2 Electro-winning — A process to produce copper by electrolytic 
deposition from an electrolyte using insoluble anodes. 

3.3.3 Fire Refining — A process to refining copper by oxidation and 
subsequent reduction in the molten state. 

3.4 Copper Alloys 

3.4.1 Brass — Any copper alloy with zinc as the principal alloying 
element with or without small quantities of some other elements. 

3.4.2 Bronze — A term originally used for referring to copper alloys 
having tin as the only or principal alloying elements. In modern 
usage the term 'bronze' is seldom used alone; and the term 'Phosphor 
Bronze' or 'Tin Bronze' is used for indicating copper-tin alloys. In 
fact, the term 'Bronze', together with a suitable qualifying adjective 
has, in recent years, been intended to apply to any of a great variety of 
copper alloys. 

3.4.3 Mickel'Silver — Copper alloy containing nickel and zinc, 
sometimes called German Silver. 

3.4.4 Cupro Nickel — A copper alloy composed of copper and nickel 
with small addition of elements such as iron and manganese. 

3.4.5 Aluminium Bronze — Alloys of copper and aluminium, with or 
without other element when other elements are present, aluminium 
predominates by mass over each of other elements. 

3.4.6 High Copper — Copper containing very low percentage of 
alloying elements say up to about 2 percent. 



INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS { SINUITS ) 



Base Units 








QjCTANTITY 


Unit 


Symboi. 




Length 


metre 


m 




Mast 


kilogram 


kg 




Time 


second 


9 




Electric current 


ampere 


A 




Thermodynamic 


kelvin 


K 




temperature 








Luminous intensity 


candela 


cd 




Amount of substance 


mole 


mol 




Supplementary Units 








Quantity 


Unit 


Symboi* 




Plane Angle 


radian 


rad 




Solid angle 


steradisin 


sr 




Derived Units 








Quantity 


Unit 


Symbol 


DKriNITION 


Force 


ne-wton 


N 


IN « 1 kg.m/s« 


Energy 


joule 


J 


IJ == 1 N.m 


Power 


watt 


W 


1 W - I J/s 


Flux 


weber 


Wb 


1 Wb = 1 V.S 


Flux density 


tesla 


T 


IT =1 Wb/m« 


Frequency 


hertz 


Hz 


1 Hz = 1 c/s (s-^) 


Electric conductance 


Siemens 


S 


IS =1 A/V 


Electromotive force 


volt 


V 


IV «= 1 W/A 


Pressure, stress 


pascal 


Pa 


1 Pa = 1 N/m» 



BUIIEAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Mansk Bhavan, I Bahadur Shah Zafaf Marg. N£W DELHI llOOIti 
r«|*ph»ne»: 331 SI 3 1, 73 1 13 n Taiagrami: Manihtanith* 

( Cnmmon la aJJ Otf\i^9s ) 



*WQ«[em : M«n(ikelayai E9 MtDC, Maro!j Andhirl (Eatt), 
BOMBAY 40M«3 

fEnstern : 1/14 C.IT. Sch«niB VII M, Vj,P. Road, ManlklAFa. 
CALCUTTA 70065* 

Norlharn : SCO 44& 449. Seclcr 35'C. 
CHANDIGARH llCO^e 

SotJtiittm I C.tTr CActipu», MADRAS HQtlS 

'Piiif)pak\ NurmDhamad ShaLhh Marg, Knanpur. AHMADABAD 3BODI91 

T' Block, Unity Bidg. Narasimharaja Sttuare, BAKGALORE UODOS 

GingtjtrJ Complex, Gth Floor, BhadbhBElii fiond. T.T. Na^ar, 
eHOPAU uaiHa 

Plel No. BZ/aa, UwJ9 Road, BHUBANESHWAR 75 VIMS 

»j9. Ward Nd. 29, R. €. BaruB Road, 5th By elans. GyWAHATI 7Sl[H)3 

5-B-S«C L^ N. Gupta Marg (Nanripallr Station R.f»d), HYDERABAD 5aOE>ai 

Ri^ YiJdliJMer Marg, C 3cili«m&» JAIPUR SOgOtiS 

11TK1B B Sarvodaja Nagar, KANPUR M8M5 

Patllpuira |ndu«tnal lEatata, PATNA BQ0013 

Hart«K Bldg {2nd FEoor), Rly Staljon Road, TRIVANORUM E;99{H91 

/flj^wf^on 0/?Tc« (With Sal a Point): 

ii'uit\pan\a]\2iii'A W«st Mlgti Cqu^I Ratti, Bha/ampalh ExCanaion 
NAGPUR 440010 

Inantulton ot EnglnaerE (Jfidia) Buddlnfi, iKZ 5hlva]l Nayar, PUNE 41100S 



32 i^ 95 

3e £4 gg 

J 218 43 
t 310 41 

1 -11 



24 47 

pa ifl 



{ 



^Saleai Offica In Bombay la at NDvelty Chambefa, firanl Road. 
BDinbDy 400007 

tSftJM CUTlcft In Car^ijlli Ji a( 5 Chowrlngha* Appraaeh, P,0- 
Princap 3ire«t, Cn.tcutta TCH3Q72 



Sfl3 4a 
£493 49 

22 4ff 9S 

««7 16 

5 3a 27 

Sd 10 3$ 
f BS4 7t 

f 21 €B 76 

1 SI OS §S 

7«e3T 
f S171 

5 24 as 

B2iS 2^ 

fi7 6B 00 



PrJntid ftJ AiMt Prett. Niw DalbirincUa 



