**************** 


-k  t^^ 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live'' 


^^^Eii^^^^^ti^^i  iil%k^K>S:^^S^T<^ 


IS  3597  (1998) :  Concrete  pipes 
Cement  Matrix  Products] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New" 


Methods    of   test     [CED    53: 


i&^^f  f /lA^sh^^JS^  rsJ^a^TTTF^ 


:<>5&i|  mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 


K^^^iXSVCd^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangarara  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


^'^^^r 


k 


BLANK  PAGE 


^*-^^^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


IS  3597  :  1998 

( Reaffirmed  2003 ) 


rumK  wnw 


Indian  Standard 
CONCRBTE  PIPES  —  METHODS  OF  TEST 

(  Second  Revision  ) 


First  Reprint  MAY  2006 
(Including  Amendment  No.    1   and  2) 


ICS  23.040.90,91.100.30 


O  BIS  1998 

BUREAU     OF    INDIAN     STANDARDS 

MANAK    BHAVAN,    9    BAHADUR    SHAH    ZAFAR    MARG 
NEW  DELHI   110002 

July  1998  Price  Group  4 


AMENDMENT    NO.    1     MARCH  2003 

TO 

IS  3597  :  1998     CONCRETE  PIPES  —  METHODS  OF 

TEST 

(Second  Revision) 

(  Page  4,  clause  8  )  —  Substitute  the  following  for  the  existing: 

8  PERMEABILITY  TEST 

8.1  Prestressed  Concrete  Pipes  and  Precast  Concrete  Pipes 

This  test  shall  be  done  on  outside  surface  of  the  pipe.  No  additional  treatment  of 
any  type  shall  be  done  on  the  pipe  before  permeability  test  is  carried  out.  For 
Prestressed  Concrete  Pipe,  the  test  shall  be  conducted  at  3  places  on  coating  and 
for  Precast  Concrete  Pipe  at  2  places  simultaneously,  immediately  after  curing  is 
completed  (see  Fig.  4),  In  case  this  is  done  later*  the  pipe  shall  be  kept  wet  for  48 
hours  prior  to  test.  For  plain/flush  ended  precast  pipes,  it  shall  be  carried  out 
about  300  mm  away  from  both  ends. 

8.U  Procedure 

The  dry  surface  of  the  pipe  shall  be  scrapped  by  wire  brush  and  loose  particles,  if 
any,  removed.  Sealant  shall  then  be  applied  to  the  lower  portion  of  the  cup  and 
cup  shall  be  pressed  on  the  pipe.  After  hardening  of  sealant,  water  shall  be  filled 
in  the  cup  with  wash  bottle.  The  glass  tube  with  rubber  cork  shall  then  be  fixed 
in  the  cup  as  shown  in  Fig.  4.  Water  in  the  tube  shall  then  be  filled  using  wash 
bottle  and  air  shall  be  allowed  to  escape  during  filling.  Precaution  shall  be  taken, 
so  that  water  does  not  leak  either  from  cup  ends  or  from  the  rubber  stopper. 

8,L2  Initial  Absorption 

Water  shall  be  filled  up  to  zero  mark  and  reading  shall  be  taken  at  every  half 
hour  interval  up  to  two  hours.  The  drop  in  water  level  in  the  stand  pipe  at  the 
end  of  two  hours  in  the  initial  absorption. 


Amend  No.  1  to  IS  35V7  :  1998 

8.1.3  Final  Perm.eability 

Fill  the  water  in  the  stand  pipe  again  up  to  zero  mark  and  lake  the  reading  at  one 
hour  interval  up  to  4  h.  The  absorption  in  the  fourth  hour,  that  is»  difference 
between  fourth  and  third  hour  readings  is  the  final  permeability.  The  average  of 
tests  conducted  at  three  places  for  prestressed  concrete  pipe  and  two  places  for 
precast  concrete  pipe  shall  be  expressed  in  cm  as  fmal  permeability. 

Criteria  for  acceptance  is  the  final  permeability.' 

(  Page  4»  clause  7.2.4  )  —  Substitute  the  fbllowing  for  the  existing: 

*7.2.4  Pressure  shall  be  maintained  for  1  min  +  30  s  for  each  10  mm  of  wall 
thickness  (for  precast  concrete  pipes  wall  thickness  shall  be  full  barrel  wall 
thickness,  whereas  it  shall  be  core  thickness,  in  case  of  prestressed  concrete  pipe) 
or  for  twice  that  entire  period  if  the  application  of  pressure  resulted  in  the 
formation  of  beads  of  water  on  the  pipe  surface. ' 

(  Page  4,  clause  7.2.6,  line  4  )  —  Insert  the  following  at  the  end  of  first 
sentence: 

'(for  precast  concrete  pipes  wall  thickness  shall  be  full  barrel  wall  thickness, 
whereas  it  shall  be  core  thickness,  in  case  of  prestressed  concrete  pipe)' 

(  Page  5,  Fig.  4  )  —  Substitute  the  figure  given  on  page  3  for  the  existing: 


Amend  No.  1  to  IS  3597:1998 


X 


m 

s 

a 

»     I 

^^ 

k      B^ 

t;  .: 

^t" 

If 

s 

^lI 

♦  I 

si 

^ 

e 

s 

o 
o 

< 
a,  bi 

35 

22 


(CED53 


|/>UJ 


o-S 


J 


CO 


o 

z 
o 
u 

o: 

p 


< 
u 
O 

3 

a 


0^ 

O 
U 
u. 
O 


Q 
O 


O 
UU 


Printed  at  Dec  Kay  Primers,  New  Delhi 


AMENDMENT  NO.  2    JULY  2005 

TO 

IS  3597  :  1998    CONCRETE  PERES  -  METHODS 

OF  TEST 

(  Second  Revidon  ) 

[  Page  4,  clause  8.1  {see  also  Amendment  No,!)]  —  Substitute  the 
following  for  the  existing  heading: 

•8.1  Prestressed  Concrete  Pipes,  BaiyWire  Wrapped  Steel  Cylinder  Pipes 
with  Mortar  Lining  and  Coating  and  Precast  Concrete  Pipes* 

[  Page  4,  clause  8.1,  third  sentence  {see  also  Amendment  No,  1)  ]  — 
Substitute  the  following  for  the  existing: 

For  Prestresscd  Concrete  Pipes  and  Bar/Wires  Wrapped  Steel  Cylinder  Pipes 
with  Mortar  Lining  and  Coating,  the  test  shall  be  conducted  at  three  places  on 
coating  and  for  Precast  concrete  pipes  at  two  places  simultaneously, 
inuncdiatcly  after  curing  is  completed  {see  Fig.  4).' 

[  Page  4,  clause  8.1.3,  third  sentence  {see  also  Amendment  No.  1)  1  — 
Substitute  the  following  for  the  existing: 

'The  average  erf  tests  conducted  at  three  places  for  Prcstressed  Concrete  Pipes 
and  Bar/Wire  Wrapped  Steel  Cylinder  Pipes  with  Mortar  Lining  and  Coating 
and  the  average  of  tests  conducted  at  two  places  for  Precast  Concrete  Pipes 
shall  be  expressed  in  cm^  as  final  permeability.  * 

[  Page  5,  Fig,  4  {see  also  Amendment  No,\)]  —  Substitute  *N.B.  6.25  ± 
0.06  nun  or  O.D.  8  nun  with  wall  thickness  of  1.00  ±  0.25  mm*  for  *N-B. 
6.3\  as  dimension  of  glass  tube. 


(CED  53) 


Printed  at  Dec  Kay  Printers,  New  Delhi 


Cement  Matrix  Products  Sectional  Committee,  CED  53 


FOREWORD 

This  Indian  Standard  (  Second  Revision  )  was  adopted  by  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards,  after  the  draft  finalized 
by  the  Cement  Matrix  Products    Sectional  Committee  had  been  approved  by  the  Civil  Engineering  Division 

Council. 

Apart  from  the  requirements  regarding  the  design,  materials,  processes  of  manufacture,  dimensions,  shape, 
workmanship  and  fmish,  etc,  acceptability  of  pipes  is  determined  by  the  results  of  various  tests  to  evaluate  the 
properties  stipulated  in  the  relevant  Indian  Standard  specifications.  This  standard  lays  down  the  procedures  for 
conducting  tests  relating  to  load  bearing,  absorption,  hydrostatic,  permeability  and  straightness  of  concrete  pipes, 
both  reinforced  concrete  and  prestressed  concrete  of  pressure  and  non-pressure  types. 

In  addition  to  the  tests  specified  in  this  standard,  inspection  of  the  process  of  manufacture,  the  quality  of  the 
finished  pipe  and  other  tests  for  the  quality  control  of  materials  during  manufacture  shall  be  carried  out  as  per 
requirements  of  relevant  Indian  Standards. 

This  standard  was  first  published  in  1966  and  subsequently  revised  in  1985.  This  revision  incorporates 
modifications  mainly  in  respect  of  hydrostatic  test  and  permeability  test  which  was  found  necessary  in  the  light 
of  experience  gained  during  the  use  of  this  standard. 

The  composition  of  the  technical  committee  responsible  for  the  formulation  of  this  standard  is  given  in  Annex 
A. 

In  reporting  the  result  of  a  test  or  analysis  made  in  accordance  with  this  standard,  if  the  final  value,  observed  or 
calculated,  is  to  be  rounded  off,  it  shall  be  done  in  accordance  with  IS  2  :  1960  'Rules  for  rounding  off  numerical 
values  {revised)\ 


IS  3597  :  1998 


Indian  Standard 

CONCRETE  PIPES  —  METHODS  OF  TEST 

( Second  Revision ) 


1  SCOPE 

This  standard  covers  methods  for  carrying  out  the 
following  tests  on  concrete  pipes,  both  reinforced 
concrete  and  prestrcsscd  concrete  and  of  pressure  and 
non-pressure  types  to  evaluate  the  properties 
stipulated  in  the  relevant  Indian  Standards: 

a)  Three-edge  bearing  test, 

b)  Absorption  test, 

c)  Hydrostatic  test, 

d)  Permeability  test,  and 

e)  Straightness  test. 

2  INSPECTION 

The  quality  of  all  materials,  process  of  manufacture 
and  the  finished  pipes  shall  be  subject  to  inspection  and 
approval  by  the  purchaser.  If  the  pipe  is  tested  for 
three-edge  bearing  or  absorption,  inspection  of  the 
reinforcement  shall  be  made  on  the  pipe  sections  used 
for  those  tests. 

3  GENERAL  PRECAUTIONS 

3.1  The  test  specimens  shall  not  have  been  exposed  to 
a  temperature  below  4°C  for  24  hours  immediately 
preceding  the  test  and  shall  be  free  from  all  visible 
moisture.  The  specimens  shall  be  inspected  and  any 
specimen  with  visible  flaws  shall  be  discarded. 

3.2  If  any  test  specimen  fails  because  of  mechanical 
reasons,  such  as  failure  of  testing  equipment  or 
improper  specimen  preparation,  it  shall  be  discarded 
and  another  specimen  taken. 

4  SELECTION  OF  TEST  SPECIMENS 

In  addition  to  the  requirements  specified  in  this 
standard,  the  number  of  test  specimens  and  the  method 
of  their  selection  shall  be  in  accordance  with  the 
specification  for  the  type  of  pipe  being  tested. 

5  THREE-EDGE  BEARING  TEST 

5.1  General 

Three-edge  bearing  test  shall  be  performed  by  the 
method  given  in  5.2.  The  pipe  shall  be  surface  dry 
when  tested.  The  test  specimen  shall  be  tested  in  a 
machine  so  designed  that  a  crushing  force  may  be 
exerted  in  a  true  vertical  plane  through  one  diameter 
and  extending  the  full  length  of  the  barrel  of  the  pipe 
but  excluding  the  sockets,  if  any. 


5.2  Three*Edge  Bearing  Method 
5.2.1  Apparatus 

5.2.1.1  Testing  machine 

Any  mechanical  or  hand-powered  device  may  be  used 
in  which  the  head  that  applies  the  load  moves  at  such 
a  speed  as  to  increase  the  load  at  a  uniform  rate  of 
approximately  20  percent  of  the  expected  crushing 
load  per  linear  metre  per  minute.  The  loading  device 
shall  be  calibrated  within  an  accuracy  of  ±2  percent. 
The  testing  machine  used  for  the  load  tests  should 
produce  a  uniform  deflection  throughout  the  full 
length  of  the  pipe  and  shall  be  so  substantial  and  rigid 
throughout,  that  the  distribution  of  the  test  load  along 
the  length  of  the  barrel  of  the  pipe  will  not  be 
appreciably  affected  by  the  deformation  or  yielding  of 
any  part  of  the  machine  during  the  application  of  the 
load. 

5.2.1.2  Lower  bearing  block 

The  lower  bearing  block  (see  Fig.  1)  shall  consist  of 
two  hardwood  or  hard  rubber  strips  fastened  to  a 
wooden  or  steel  beam  or  direct  to  a  concrete  base, 
which  shall  provide  sufficient  rigidity  to  permit 
application  of  maximum  load  without  appreciable 
deflection.  Wooden  or  rubber  strips  shall  be  straight, 
have  a  cross-section  of  not  less  than  50  mm  in  width 
and  not  less  than  25  mm  nor  more  than  40  mm  in  height 
and  shall  have  the  top  inside  corners  rounded^  to  a 
radius  of  approximately  15  mm.  The  interior  vertical 
sides  of  the  strips  shall  be  parallel  and  spaced  apart  a 
distance  of  not  more  than  1/1 2th  of  the  specimen 
diameter  but  in  no  case  less  than  25  mm.  The  bearing 
faces  of  the  bottom  strips  shall  not  vary  from  a  straight 
line  vertically  or  horizontally  by  more  than  1  mm  in 
375  mm  of  the  length  under  load. 

About  6  mm  thick  hard  rubber  or  felt  should  be 
placed/fixed  at  the  lower  face  of  the  upper  wooden 
block  which  shall  come  in  contact  with  the  surface  of 
the  pipe. 

5.2.1.3  Upper  bearing  block 

The  upper  bearing  shall  be  a  rigid  hardwood  block  or 
a  block  with  hard  rubber  facing  at  least  1 50  mm  x  1 50 
mm  in  cross-isection.  The  wood  block  shall  be  free  of 
knots  and  shall  be  straight  and  true  from  end  to  end.  It 
shall  be  fastened  to  a  steel  or  wood  faced  steel  beam 


1 


IS  3597  :  1998 


J- 


SOCKET 
BEYOND 
BEARING 


BARREL  OF 
PIPE 


LOWER 
BEARING 


LOWER   BEARING 

AT    LEAST 
150  x  150  m  m 


SPACE  BETWEEN  TWO  STRIPS 
NOT  MORE  THAN  1/12  OF  PIPE 
DIA    BUT  NOT   LESS  THAN  25  mr 


ENLARGED   DETAIL  OF   LOWER    BEARING 


Fig.  1  Three-Edge  Bearing  Method 


of  such  dimensions  that  deflections  under  maximum 
load  will  not  be  appreciable.  The  bearing  face  of  the 
upper  bearing  block  shall  not  deviate  from  a  straight  line 
by  more  than  I  mm  in  375  mm  of  length  under  load. 

5.2.1.4  The  equipment  shall  be  so  designed  that  the 
load  will  be  distributed  about  the  center  of  the  overall 
length  of  the  pipe  {see  Fig.  1 ).  The  load  may  be  applied 
either  at  a  single  point  or  at  multiple  points  dependent 
on  the  length  of  the  pipe  being  tested  and  the  rigidity 
of  the  test  frame. 

NOTE  —  Multiple  points  ofload  applicable  to  the  top  bearing 
will  permii  use  of  lighter  beams  without  appreciable  deflection. 

5.2.1.5  Crack  measuring  gauge 

The  crack  measuring  gauge  shall  be  made  from  0.25  mm 
thick  strip  and  shall  be  of  a  shape  as  shown  in  Fig.  2. 

5.2.2  Procedure 

5*2.2.1  The  specimen  shall  be  placed  on  the  two 
bottom  bearing  strips  in  such  a  manner  that  the  pipe 


tests  firmly  and  with  the  most  uniform  possible  bearing 
on  each  strip  for  the  full  length  of  the  pipes  less  the 
socket  portion,  if  any. 

If  mutually  agreed  upon  by  the  manufacturer  and  the 
purchaser  prior  to  the  test,  a  fillet  of  plaster  of  Paris  not 
exceeding  25  mm  in  thickness  may  be  cast  on  the 
surface  of  the  upper  and  lower  bearing  before  the  pipe 
is  placed.  The  width  of  the  fillet  cap,  top  or  bottom, 
shall  be  not  more  than  25  mm  per  300  mm  diameter, 
but  in  no  case  less  than  25  mm. 

5.2,2.2  Each  end  of  the  pipe  at  a  point  mid-way 
between  the  lower  bearing  strips  shall  be  marked  and 
then  diametrically  opposite  points  thereof  shall  be 
established.  The  top  bearing  block  shall  be  so  placed 
that  it  contacts  the  two  ends  of  the  pipe  at  these  marks. 
After  placing  the  specimen  in  the  machine  on  the 
bottom  strips,  the  top  bearing  shall  be  symmetrically 
aligned  in  the  testing  machine.  Load  shall  be  appVicd 
at  the  rate  indicated  in  5.2.1.1  until  either  the  formation 


IS  3597  :  1998 


1»5mm 


TAPER  1  IN  4 


- 0*25  mm  THICK 


Fig.  2  Gauge  Leaf  for  Measuring  Cracks 

of  a  0.25  mm  wide  crack  or  ultimate  strength  load,  as 
may  be  specified,  has  been  reached.  If  both  the  0.25  mm 
crack  and  ultimate  load  are  required,  the  specified  rate 
of  loading  need  not  be  maintained  after  the  load  at 
0.25  mm  crack  has  been  determined. 

5.2.2.3  The  0.25  mm  crack  load  is  the  maximum  load 
applied  to  the  pipe  before  a  crack  having  a  width 
of  0.25  mm  measured  at  close  intervals,  occurs 
throughout  a  length  of  300  mm  or  more.  The  crack 
shall  be  considered  0.25  mm  in  width  when  the  point 
of  the  measuring  gauge  described  in  5.2.1,5  penetrates 
1.5  mm  at  close  intervals  throughout  the  specified 
distance  of  300  mm.  The  ultimate  load  will  be  reached 
when  the  pipe  will  sustain  no  greater  load. 

5.2.3  Calculation 

The  crushing  strength  in  Newton  per  linear  metre  of 
pipe  shall  be  calculated  by  dividing  the  total  load  on 
the  specimen  by  the  nominal  laying  length.  Effective 
length  of  the  pipe  shall  be  taken  as  the  nominal  laying 
length  of  the  specimen.  In  case  of  spigot  and  socket 
ended  pipes,  the  effective  length  shall  be  equal  to  the 
overall  length  minus  the  depth  of  socket  (see  Fig,  3) 
and  in  case  of  collar  and  flush  jointed  pipes,  the 
effective  length  shall  be  equal  to  the  overall  length. 

NOTE  —  In  most  machines  the  total  load  will  include  the  dead 
weight  of  the  top  bearing  plus  the  load  applied  by  the  loading 
apparatus. 


6  ABSORPTION  TEST 

6.1  Test  Specimen 

Each  specimen  selected  at  random  shall  have  a  square 
area  of  100  cm^  ±  10  percent  of  the  length  of  the  pipe 
as  measured  on  surface  of  the  pipe,  and  a  thickness 
equal  to  the  full  depth  of  the  pipe  thickness  and  shall 
be  free  from  visible  cracks. 

6.2  Procedure 

6.2.1  Drying  Specimens 

Specimens  shall  be  dried  in  a  mechanical  convection 
oven  at  a  temperature  of  lOS^'C  to  1 I5X  until  two 
successive  weighings  at  intervals  of  not  less  than  8  h 
show  an  increment  of  loss  not  greater  than  0. 1  percent 
of  the  mass  of  the  specimen.  The  drying  time  shall  be 
not  less  than  36  h.  The  dry  mass  of  the  specimen  shall 
be  the  mass  after  the  final  drying  determined  at 
ambient  temperature, 

6.2.2  After  drying  and  weighing  as  specified  in  6.2.1, 
the  specimens  shall  be  immersed  in  clean  water  at 
room  temperature  for  the  specified  period.  The 
specimens  shall  then  be  removed  from  the  water  and 
allowed  to  drain  for  not  more  than  one  minute.  The 
superficial  water  shall  then  be  removed  by  absorbent 
cloth  or  paper  and  the  specimens  weighed 
immediately. 

6.2.3  The  least  count/accuracy  of  the  weighing 
balance  shall  be  0. 1  g  which  the  test  specimen  shall  be 
weighed. 

6.2.4  Calculation  and  Report 

The  increase  in  mass  of  the  specimen  over  its  dry  mass 
shall  be  taken  as  the  absorption  of  the  specimen  and 
shall  be  expressed  as  a  percentage  of  the  dry  mass.  The 
results  shall  be  reported  separately  for  each  specimen. 

7  HYDROSTATIC  TEST 

7.1  Test  Specimen 

The  specimens  for  determination  of  leakage  under 
internal  hydrostatic  pressure  shall  be  sound  and 
full-site  pipe.  If  the  pipes  are  tested  after  storing  in 
adverse  weather  condition  presoaking  shall  be 
permitted.  For  presoaking  pipes  shall  be  submerged  in 
water  or  sprayed  with  water  for  a  period  not  less  than 
6  hours  prior  to  testing  and  excess  water  removed. 

7.2  Procedure 

7.2.1  The  pipe  shall  be  supported  in  such  a  way  so  that 
the  longitudinal  axis  is  approximately  horizontal  and 
the  exterior  surface  excepting  the  supports  can  be 
examined  readily. 

7.2.2  The  equipment  for  making  the  test  shall  be  such 
that  the  specimen  under  test  can  be  filled  with  water  to 


IS  3597  :  1998 


i 


4 


Fig.  3  Illustrating  Effective  Length  *E'  of  Pipes 


the  exclusion  of  air  and  subjected  to  the  required 
hydrostatic  pressure.  Apply  hydrostatic  pressure  to  the 
whole  pipe  including  the  portion  of  socket  and  rebated 
joints,  that  is»  subjected  to  pressure  in  the  *as  laid' 
condition. 

7.2.3  The  specimen  shall  be  filled  with  water  and  the 
air  expelled.  Pressure  shall  be  applied  at  a  gradual  rate 
until  the  specified  test  pressure  is  reached,  or  beads  of 
water  on  the  pipe  surface  is  seen,  whichever  occurs 
first. 

7.2.4  Pressure  shall  be  maintained  for  1  min  +  30  s  for 
each  10  mm  of  wall  thickness,  or  for  twice  that  entire 
period  if  the  application  of  pressure  resulted  in  the 
formation  of  beads  of  water  on  the  pipe  surface. 

7.2.5  At  the  end  of  the  holding  period,  the  pressure 
shall  be  released  immediately  if  the  test  pressure  has 
been  maintained.  If  the  beads  of  the  water  "have  not 
grown  or  run  the  pressure  shall  be  increased  slowly 
until  the  test  pressure  is  reached  or  the  beads  of  water 
grow  or  run  (  whichever  occurs  first ). 

7.2.6  If  the  test  pressure  has  been  reached  without  the 
beads  of  water  growing  or  running,  the  test  pressure 
shall  be  maintained  constant  for  I  min  +  30  s  for  each 
10  mm  of  wall  thickness.  At  the  end  of  the  holding 
period  the  pressure  shall  be  released  immediately. 

After  releasing  the  pressure,  the  test  pipe  shall  be 
drained  completely. 

8  PERMEABILITY  TEST 

8,1  Prestressed  Concrete  Pipes 

8, LI  Procedure 

The  dry  surface  of  the  pipe  shall  be  scrapped  by  wire 
brush  and  loose  particles,  if  any,  removed.  Sealant 
shall  then  be  applied  to  the  lower  portion  of  the  cup 
and  shall  be  pressed  on  the  pipe.  The  water  shall  then 
be  filled  in  the  cup  with  wash  bottle  after  hardening  of 
the  sealant.  The  glass  tube  with  cork  shall  then  be  fixed 
in  the  cup  as  shown  in  Fig.  4.  Water  in  the  tube  shall 
then  be  filled  using  wash  bottle  and  air  shall  be  allowed 
to  escape  during  filling.  Precaution  shall  be  taken  so 
that  water  does  not  leak  either  from  cup  ends  or  from 
rubber  stopper.  Water  shall  be  filled  up  to  zero  mark 
and  reading  taken  at  every  half-  hour  interval  up  to  2 
hours.  On  each  pipe,  simultaneously  three  tests  shall 


be  done  immediately  after  curing  of  coating  is 
completed  as  shown  in  Fig.  4. 

8.L2  Initial  Absorption 

The  drop  of  water  level  in  the  stand  pipe  at  the  end  of 
2  h  is  initial  absorption.  The  difference  in  any  two 
readings  shall  not  be  more  than  0.8  cm  , 

8.L3  Final  Permeability 

Fill  the  water  in  the  stand  pipe  again  up  to  the  mark 
and  take  readings  at  half-hour  interval  up  to  4  hours. 
Absorption  in  the  fourth  hour,  that  is,  difference 
between  fourth  and  third  reading  is  the  final 
permeability.  The  average  reading  of  three  tests 
conducted  on  a  pipe  shall  be  expressed  in  cm  and  this 
shall  not  exceed  0.3  cm  . 

9    STRAIGHTNESS  TEST 

9.1  Procedure 

9.1.1  A  rigid  straight  edge,  made  into  a  gauge  of  the 
form  and  dimension  shown  in  Fig.  5  shall  be  placed  in 
the  bore  of  the  pipe  with  edge  X  in  contact  with  the 
pipe  internal  surface  and/or  the  line  parallel  to  the  pipe 
axis.  Hold  the  plane  of  the  gauge  in  a  radial  plane. 

9.1.2  If  both  ends  of  the  gauge,  when  so  placed  are  in 
contact  with  the  internal  surface  of  the  pipe,  the 
deviation  from  straightness  is  excessive.  If  this 
condition  occurs  at  any  one  of  four  different  positions 
of  the  gauge,  approximately  equally  spaced  around  the 
pipe  circumference  the  pipe  does  not  comply  with  the 
particular  requirement. 

9.1.3  If  both  ends  of  the  gauge,  when  used  as 
described  in  9.1.1,  are  not  in  contact  with  the  internal 
surface  of  the  pipe  at  both  ends,  the  gauge  shall  be 
reversed  so  that  edge  Y,  placed  as  in  9.1.1,  is  adjusted 
to  the  internal  surface  of  the  pipe.  If  the  two  studs  in 
edge  y  cannot  be  made  to  touch  the  surface  of  the  pipe 
simultaneously,  the  deviation  from  the  straightness  is 
excessive. 

If  this  condition  occur  at  any  four  position  of  the  gauge 
the  pipe  does  not  conform  with  this  particular 
requirements. 


18  3597:1998 


GLASS  TUBE 


<»20  6At0  5 


20 mm  SOFT 
RUBBER  STOPPER 


SEALANT 
(LIKE  EPOXY) 


/.  "  '. '  PIPE  !-.*■; 


5 ^sis!!,?,--! 


^86  -00- 


METAL  CUP 
INSIDE    AREA"3000mm^ 


TEST    AT  3  aACES 


/h 


p.s.a/R.c.c. 


1 


/ 


PLASTIC    WASH   BOTTLE 


TYPICAL  LOCATION  FOR    CONDUCTING  TEST 

All  dimensions  in  millimetres. 

Fig.  4  Method  for  Permeability  Testing  of  Concrete  Pipes 


10  k- 

H 


V 


rMARK  ON 


-EDGE  Y 

Ledge  x-i;Qh-i 


1000 


Y3 


500 


All  dimensions  in  millimetres. 

Fig.  5  Straightness  Test 


i;^ti. 


T 


IS  3597 :  1998 


ANNEX  A 

( Foreword ) 
COMMITEE  COMPOSITION 

Cement  Matrix  Products  Sectional  Committee,  CED  53 


Chairman 
Shri  S.  a.  Reddi 
Members 
Shri  K.  H.  Ganowm. 

Shri  V.  Pattabhi  ( Alternate  ) 
Dr  C.  Rajkumar 

Shri  H.  K.  Julka  ( Alternate  ) 
Shri  R.  Subramaniam 

Shri  K.  P.  Abraham  ( Alternate ) 
Shri  P.  S.  Roy 

Dr  a.  S.  Goyal  { Alternate  ) 
Joint  Director  Standards  (B&S)-CB-H 

Asstt  Design  Engineer  (CS-1)  ( Alternate ) 
Shrj  D.  K.  Kanunoo 

Shri  T.  Choudhury  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  C.  H.  Subramanian 

Shri  A.  Dutta  (  Alternate ) 
Dr  Irsad  Masood 

Shri  S.  P.  Tehri  ( Alternate ) 
Shri  O.  P.  Agarwal 

Shri  J.  L.  Dhingra  (  Alternate ) . 
Shri  P.  S.  Kalani 

Shri  N.  Kishan  Reddy  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  P.  D.  Kelkar 

Shri  P.  R.  C.  Nair  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  G.S.  Shiralkar 

Shri  A,V.  Gogte  ( Alternate  ) 
Shri  A.  K.  Chadha 

Shri  J.  R.  Sil  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  S.  Hariramasamy 
Dr  V.  S.  Parameswaran 

Shri  A.  K.  Mani  (  Alternate ) 
Chief  Engineer 

Dy  Chief  Engineer  {  Alternate  ) 
Shri  S.  P.  Rastogi 
Shri  G.  R.  Bharitkar 

Coi-  (Retd)  D.  V.  Padsalgikar  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  B,  V.  B.  Pal 

Shri  M.  G.  Dandwate  ( Alternate  ) 
Shri  M.  A.  Azeez 

Shri  P.  D.  Gaikawad  ( Alternate  ) 
Shri  K.  Srivastava 
Shri  Vinod  Kumar, 
Dircctof  (Civ  Engg) 


Representing 
Gammon  India  Ltd.  Mumbai 

Hyderabad  Industries  Ltd,  Sanatnagar 

National  Council  for  Cement  and  Building  Materials,  New  Delhi 

Central  Public  Works  Department,  New  Delhi 

Engineer-in-Chiefs  Branch,  Army  Headquarters,  New  Delhi 

Research,  Design  and  Standards  Ch^antzation,  Lucknow 

National  Test  House,  Calcutta 

Small  Scale  Industries,  New  Delhi 

Central  Building  Research  Institute,  Roorkee 

Municipal  Corporation  of  Delhi.  Delhi 

All  India  Small  Scale.  AC.  Pressure  Pipes  Manufacturers  Association. 

Hyderabad 
Indian  Hume  Pipe  Co  Ltd,  Mumba\ 

Spun  Pipes  Manufacturers  Association  of  Maharashtra  (SSI),  Punc 

Hindustan  Prefab  Ltd,  New  Delhi 

Tamil  Nadu  Water  Supply  and  Drainage  Board.  Chennai 
Structural  Engineering  Research  Centre,  Oiennai 

Municipal  Corporation  of  Greater  Mumbai,  Mumbai 

Federation  of  UP  Pip)c  Manufacturers,  Lucknow 
B,G.  Shiike  Construction  Technology  Pvt  Ltd,  Pune 

The  Associated  Cement  Companies  Ltd,  Thane 

Rural  Electrification  Corporation  Ltd,  New  Delhi 

Etemit  Everest  Ltd,  Mumbai 

Director  General,  BIS  (  Ex-offlcio  Member  ) 


Member-Secretary 

Shri  J.  K.  Prasad 
Additional  Director  (Civ  Engg),  BIS 


(  Continued  on  page  1 ) 


(  Continued  from  pctfje  6  ) 


IS  3597  :  1998 


Concrete  Pipes  Subcommittee^  CED  53  :  2 


Members 
Shri  p.  D.  Kelkar 

Shri  B.  Sankarasubaramonia  Ayyar 
ShriG.  S.  Shiralkar 

Shri  Mukund  Namdeo  Pore  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  R,A.  Dubey.  SO(UTiLrrY) 

Maj  S.  Ahlawat,  S02  Utility  ( Alternate ) 
Shri  Suddhodan  Roy 

Shri  A.  K.  Chadha  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  A.  V.Talati 

Shri  A.  A.  Talati  (  Alternate ) 
Shri  K.  Nagarajan 
Dr  B.  Venkteswarlu 

Shri  J.  Shanmugasundaram  (/4//f/7ia/g) 
SupTD  Surveyor  of  Works  (NZ) 

Surveyor  of  Works  (NZ)  (  Alternate  ) 
Chief  Engineer  (Sewerage  Project)  (R&D) 

Shri  G.  G.  Pathak  (  Alternate ) 
Managing  Director 

Shri  H.  S.  Manik  (  Alternate  ) 
DrC.  Rajkumar 

Shri  H.  K.  Julka  (  Alternate ) 
ShriS.  N.  Basu 

Shri  T.  N.  Uboveja  ( Alternate  ) 
Shri  A.  W.  Deshpande 

Shri  B.  V,  Kale  ( Alternate  ) 
Shri  S.  S.  Ramrakhyani 

Shri  S,  Prakash  ( Alternate  ) 
Shri  P.  S.  Gupta 


Convener 
ShriN  G  Joshi 
A-5.  Adinmh  Antophill,  Mumbai  40(X)37 

Representtnfi 
Indian  Hume  Pipe  Co  Ltd,  Mumbai 
The  Kerala  Premo  Pipe  Factory  Ltd,  Quilon 
Spun  Pipes  Manufacturers  Association  of  Maharashtra  (SSI),  Pune 

Engineer-in-Chiefs  Branch,  Army  HcacJquarters,  New  Delhi 

Hindustan  Prefab  Ltd,  New  Delhi 

Spunpipe  and  Construction  Co  (Baroda)  Pvt  iJd,  Vadodara 

Tamil  Nadu  Water  Supply  and  Drainage  Board,  Chennai 
StructuraJ  Engineering  Research  Centre  (CSIR),  Chennai 

Central  Pubhc  Works  Department,  New  Delhi 

Municipal  Corporation  of  Greater  Mumbai,  Mumbai 

Concrete  Pipe  Manufacturers  Association  of  India,  New  Delhi 

National  Council  for  Cement  and  Building  Materials,  New  Delhi 

Directorate  General  of  Supplies  and  Disposals.  New  Delhi 

National  Environmental  Engineering  Research  Institute,  Nagpur 

Municipal  Corporation  of  Delhi,  EXMhi 


Shri  Vidur  Bhaskar  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  D,  N.  Garg 
Shri  B.  K.  Agarwal 

Shri  S.  P.  Rastogi  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  S,  Basu 

Shri  S.  D.  Kanga  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  U  C  Jain 

Shri  P.  K.  Sharma  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  Y  N.  Chaturvedi 

Shri  V.  K.  Gupta  (  Alternate  ) 
Joint  Director,  Standards  (B&S)-CB-I 

(Joint  Director,  Standards  (B&S)-CB-II  ( Alternate  ) 


Haryana  Cement  Concrete  Pipes  and  Poles  Manufacturers  Association, 
Faridabad 

Modi  Steels,  Modinagar 

Federation  of  UP  Pipe  Manufacturers,  Lucknow 

Tata  Consulting  Engineers,  Mumbai 

Engineers  India  Ltd,  New  Delhi 

UP  Jal  Nigam,  Lucknow 

Research,  Design  and  Standards  Organization,  Lucknow 


Bureau  of  Indian  Standards 

BIS  IS  a  statutory  institution  established  under  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  Act,  1986  to  promote 
liannonious  development  of  the  activities  of  standardization,  marking  and  quality  certification  of  goods 
and  attending  to  connected  matters  in  the  country. 

(  opvrij^ht 

BiS  lias  the  copyright  of  all  its  publications.  No  part  of  these  publications  may  be  reproduced  in  any 
form  \Mthout  the  prior  permission  in  writing  of  BIS  This  does  not  preclude  the  free  use,  in  course  of 
implementing  the  standard,  of  necessary  details,  such  as  symbols  and  si/cs,  type  or  grade  designations. 
fMiquiries  relating  to  copyright  be  addressed  to  the  Director  (Publications),  BIS. 

RevicMv  of  Indian  Standards 

Amendments  are  issued  to  standards  as  the  need  arises  on  the  basis  of  comments.  Standards  are  also 
rcMCwed  periodically,  a  standard  along  with  amendments  is  reaffirmed  when  such  review  indicates  that 
no  cliangcs  arc  needed:  if  the  review  indicates  that  changes  are  needed,  it  is  taken  up  for  revision.  Users 
of  Indian  Standards  should  ascertain  that  they  are  in  possession  of  the  latest  amendments  or  edition  by 
referring  to  the  latest  issue  of  'BIS  Catalogue'  and  \Standards  :  Monthly  Additions\ 

This  Indian  Standard  has  been  developed  from  Doc  :  No.  CED  53  (  5003  ). 

Amendments  Issued  Since  Publication 


Amendment  No. 


Date  of  Issue 


Te.xt  Affected 


BUREAU  OF  INDIAN  STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 


Manak  Bhavan.  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg.  New  Delhi  1 10  002 

TclcpluHU's  2323  013  1,  2323  3375,  2323  9402   U'ehstte:  www.bis.org.in 


Rc*;;ional  Offices: 

Ccnlrai  :     Manak  Bhavan.  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg 
N[:VV  DIT.HI  1  10  002 

raslcrn  :     1/14.  C.I.T  Scheme  VII  M.  VIP.  Road,  Kankurgachi 
KOLKATA  700  054 

Northern    SCO  335-336,  Sector  34-A,  CHANDIGARH  160  022 


Southern    C  IT  Campus,  IV  Cross  Road,  CHENNAI  600  113 


Western      Manakalaya.  H9  MIDC.  Marol,  Andheri  (East) 
MUMBAI  400  093 


Telephones 


r  2323  7617 
1  2323  3841 

{ 

2337  8499,  2337  8561 

2337  8626,  2337  9120 

/  260  3843 
I  260  9285 

{ 

2254  1216,2254  1442 

2254  2519,  2254  2315 

{ 

2832  9295,  2832  7858 

2832  7891,  2832  7892 

Branches:  AHMFDABAD.  BANGALORE  BHOPAL.  BHUBANESHWAR  COIMBATORE  FARIDABAD 
GMAZIABAD  GUWAHATI  HYDERABAD  JAIPUR.  KANPUR.  LUCKNOW  NAGPUR 
NALAGARH  PATNA  PUNE  RAJKOT.  THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.  VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Printed  at  Dec  Kay  Printers,  New  Delhi 


