**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 13580 (1992) : Internal Fuses and Internal Overpressure 
Disconnectors for Power Electronic Capacitors [ETD 29: 
Power Capacitors] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 13580 : 1992 

( Reaffirmed 2004 ) 



Indian Standard 

INTERNAL FUSES AND INTERNAL 

OVERPRESSURE DISCONNECTORS FOR 

POWER ELECTRONIC CAPACITORS 



UDC 621-316-923-621-319-4 



©BIS 1992 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

December 1992 Price Group 3 



Power Capacitors Sectional Committee, ET 29 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Power Capacitors Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical 
Division Council. 

The object of this standard is to formulate uniform requirements regarding performance, testing 
and to provide a guidance for co-ordination of fuse and disconnector protection. 

Assistance has been derived from lEC Document 33 ( Sectt ) 99 'Internal fuses and internal 
overpressure disconnectors for power electronic capacitors' issued by the International Electro- 
technical Commission ( lEC ). 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, 
the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be 
rounded off in accordance with IS 2 ; 1960 'Rules for rounding oflF numerical values ( revised )\ 
The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that 
of the specified value in this standard. 



15 13580:1992 



Indian Standard 



INTERNAL FUSES AND INTERNAL 

OVERPRESSURE DISCONNECTORS FOR 

POWER ELECTRONIC CAPACITORS 



1 SCOPE AND FIELD OF APPLICATION 3.3 Internal Overpressure Disconnector 



lA This standard applies to internal over- 
pressure disconnectors and fuses when used 
to protect power electronic capacitors 
manufactured according to IS 13648:1992 
•Power electronics capacitors'. 

1.2 This standard also applies to internal over- 
pressure disconnectors used to protect self- 
healing metalized dielectric capacitors for 
power electronics. 

1.3 This standard does not apply to fuses and 
disconnectors for which the service conditions, 
in general, are incompatible with the require- 
ments of the standard unless otherwise agreed 
between manufacturer and purchaser. 

1.4 Fuses and disconnectors conforming to 
this standard are designed to isolate faulted 
capacitors elements or capacitor unit, to allow 

.operation of the remaining parts of that 
capacitor unit and the bank in which the 
capacitor unit is connected. Such fuses and 
disconnectors are not a substitute for a switch- 
ing device such as a circuit-breaker or the 
external protection of the capacitor bank, or 
part thereof. 

2 REFERENCE 

IS 13648 : 1992 *Power Electronic capacitors' is 
a necessary adjunct to this standard. 

3 TERMINOLOGY 

3.1 Definitions of capacitor parts and 
accessories shall be in accordance with 
IS 13648 : 1992. 

NOTE — The word 'element' in this standard is 
used in accordance with the definition contained 
in capacitor specifications, and not in accordance 
with the fMse standards. 

3.2 Internal Fuse 

A device incorporated in capacitor which 
disconnects an element or a group of elements 
in the event of breakdown. 



A disconnecting device inside a capacitor, 
designed to interrupt the current path in the 
case of abnormal increase of the internal 

pressure. 

NOTES 

1 This disconnector can also be placed outside the 
capacitor unit, but is still considered an integral 
part of the capacitor unit, and siiall fulfill the same 
requ irements and pass the same tests as the inter- 
nal overpressure disconnector. 

2 This device is normally used in capacitors of the 
self-healing type. 

4 GENERAL 

4.1 The fuse is connected in series with the 
element(s) which the fuse is intended to isolate 
if the element(s) becomes faulty. The range 
of currents and voltages for the fuse is there- 
fore dependent on the capacitor design, and 
in some cases also on the bank in which the 
fuse is connected. 



The operation of an internal fuse is in general 
determined by one or both of the factors given 
in (a) and (b): 

a) the discharge energy from elements or 
units connected in parallel with the 
faulty element or unit; and 

b) the line fault current. 

4.2 The disconnector is intended to interrupt 
the current to all elements of the capacitor 
or some of them. The proper operation of the 
disconnector is dependent on the leak-tightness 
of the container during the life of the 
capacitor. 

5 DISCONNECTING REQUIREMENTS 

5.1 The fuse shall enable the faulty element to 
be disconnected when electrical breakdown of 
elements occurs in a voltage range, in which 
Ml is the lowest and «, the highest value of the 



voltage between the 
the instant of fault 



terminals of the unit at 



IS 13580 : 1992 



The reeommended values for u^ and i/g are ihe 
following: 

Wj = 0-8 Un 

U2 == see Table 1 

5.2 The disconnector shall enable the faulty 
capacitor unit to be disconnected for voltage 
up to and including Ug. 

The recommended value is: 
W3 = 1-3 U^ 

NOTE — The purchaser shall specify if this voltage 
will be exceeded, 

6 WITHSTAND REQUIREMENTS 

6.1 After operation, the fuse assembly and the 
disconnector must withstand rated element 
voltage and rated voltage between the terminals 
of the disconnected capacitor respectively, 
plus any unbalance voltage due to fuse or 
disconnector action, and any short time 
transient overvoltage normally experienced 
during the life of the capacitor. 

6.2 Throughout the life of the capacitor, the 
disconnector shall be capable of carrying conti- 
nuously a current equal to or greater than M 
times the maximum permissible imit's current 
(see 14 of IS 13648:1992) and the fuses 
capable of carrying continuously a current 
equal to or greater than maximum permissible 
unit current divided by number of parallel fuse 
paths. 

6.3 The fuse and the disconnector shall be 
capable of withstanding the surge current (4). 



6.4 The fuse connected to the undamaged 
element(s) must be able to carry the discharge 
currents due to the breakdown of element(s). 

6.5 The fuses and disconnectors must withstand 
the discharge test, see 10. 

7 MARKING 

The marking regarding presence of internal 
fuse shall be provided on the capacitor as 
indicated in IS 13648 : 1992. 

8 ROUTINE TESTS 

The unit(s) shall have passed all routine tests 
specified in IS 13643 : 1992. 

9 TYPE TESTS 

9.1 The type tests comprise following: 

a) Discharge test ( see 10 ); 

b) Disconnecting test on fuses (see 11 ); and 

c) Disconnecting test on disconnector 
{ see 12 ). 

In addition, the fuses and disconnectors shall be 
able to withstand all type test of the capacitor 
units in accrodance with IS 13748 : 1992. 

9.2 Type tests are considered valid if they are 
performed on capacitors of a design identical 
with that of the capacitor offered, or on a 
capacitor of a design that does not differ from 
it in any way that might affect the properties 
to be checked by the type tests. 



Table 1 Test Voltage Between Terminals 

(Clauses 5A, lOA artd 11.4) 





ac Capacitors 


do Capacitors 


non self-healing 


self-healing 


non self-healing self-healing 


ac 

Test voltage 

do 

Test voltage 


2 ITn/v 2 
2 U^ 


1-5 C/n/v' 2" 

2 t/K/v/T" 


C/n 


1-5 N 



NOTE — The tfi and k, values above are based on the voltage that may normally occur across the 
capacitor unit terminals at the ins tan t of electrical breakdown of the element. 
The purchaser shall specify if the «i and «• values differ from the stated ones. 



IS 13580 : 1992 



10 DISCHARGE TEST 

10.1 The units shall be charged by means of 
dc and then discharged through a gap situated as 
close as possible to the capacitor. They shall 
be subjected to five such discharges within 10 
minutes. 

The test voltage shall be equal to 1- 1 Un* 

If bo vv ever a maximum peak current is 
specified, the discharge current shall be adjusted 
by variation of the charging voltage and the 
impedance of the discharge circuit to a value 
of: 

/tf&t = 1*4 /s 

Within five minutes after this test, the unit 
shall be subjected to a voltage test between 
terminals { j^e Table 1 ). 

The capacitance shall be measured before the 
discharge test and after the voltage test. The 
measurements shall not differ by an amount 
corresponding either to breakdown of an 
element or to blowing of an internal fuse, 

11 DISCONNECTING TEST ON FUSES 
11.1 Test Procedure 

The disconnecting test on fuses is performed 
first at the upper dc test voltage u^ given in 
Table 1 and multiplied by M and then, as 
soon as possible after the blowing of one fuse, 
at the lower dc test voltage of 0*9 Un until 
the blowing of another fuse. 

The fuse action must be such that the voltage 
drop across the tested unit is equal to or less 
than 10 percent. 

If the voltage drop is more than 10 percent 
additional capacitors can be put in parallel to 
increase the parallel stored energy. 

The tests on fuses are performed either on one 11.3 Visual Checking 

complete capacitor unit or on two units, if 
there is only one fuse inside. 



3 In special cases, it may be necessary to extend 
the tests until two or more breakdowns of capacitor 
elements have occurred. The number of break- 
downs at each voltage limit shall in such cases be 
subject to agreement between manufacturer and 
purchaser. If the number of breakdowns is exceeded, 
the voltages stated in 11,4 may have to be increased. 

4 Precautions shall be taken when performing this 
test against the posible explosion of a capacitor 
unit. 

5 The voltage shall be gradually increased to the 
specified value. 

a) Capacitor preheatwg — The capacitor unit is 
preheated in a chamber before applying the 
test voltage at the upper limit. Preheating 
temperature ( lOO^C to JSO^'C ) is chosen by the 
manufacturer to achieve a practical short time 
( some minutes fo some hours ) to the first 
breakdown. 

A lower preheatirg temperature should be used 
when applying the test voltage limit ; to avoid 
breakdowns before reaching the test voltage. 
Capacitor current is to be recorded during the test . 

NOTE — To prevent excessive internal liquid 
pressure due to high temperature the unit may be 
equipped with a relief tube including a valve 
which must be closed at the instant of applying 
the test voltage. 

b) Electrical breakdown of the element — Some 
elements in the test unit are each provided with 
for example a tab, inserted between the dieleptric 
layers. Each tab is connected to a separate 
terminal. 

To obtain breakdown of an element thus equiped, 
a surge voltage of sufficient amplitude is applied 
between the tab and ohe of the foils of the 
modified element. 

Capacitor current is to be recorded during the 
test. 

11.2 Capacitance Measurement 

After the test, capacitance shall be measured 
to prove that the fuse(s) has ( have ) blown. 

A measuring method shall be used that is 
sufficiently sensitive to detect the capacitance 
change caused by one blown fuse. 



11.1.1 One of the following test procedures a), 
b) or an alternative method shall be used. If 
no agreement has been reached, the choice is 
left to the manufacturer. 

NOTES 

1 At the upper voltage limit, one additional fuse (or 
one tenth of the fused elements directly in parallel) 
connected to a sound element(s) is allowed to be 
damaged, 

2 The test voltage shall be maintained for 10 
seconds after a breakdown lo ensure the fuse has 
disconnected correctly unaided by disconnection of 
the power supply. 



After the disconnecting test, no significant 
deformation of the contamer shall be apparent. 

11.4 Voltage Test 

A voltage test shall be carried out by applying 
M times the voltage mentioned in Table 1 for 
a period of 10 s. 

12 DISCONNECTING TEST ON 
DISCONNECTOR 

12.1 Test Sequence 

The test shall be carried out on a capacitor 
unit. 



IS 13580: 1992 



Unless agreed otherwise, a capacitor which has 
passed the endurance test ( under consideration ) 
may be used. 

The capacitor shall be mounted in a circulat- 
ing air oven having a temperature equal to the 
maximum ambient air temperature of the 
temperature category of the capacitor. 

When all the parts of the capacitor have 
reached the temperature of the oven the 
following test sequence shall be performed with 
the circuit given in Fig. 1. 

a) With the selector switches H and K in 
position *r and a respectively the N 
voltage source is set to 1-3 Un and the 
capacitor current is recorded. The A^ 
source is ac for testing ac capacitors 
and dc for dc capacitor. 

b) The r source is set to 10?7n the switch 
H is then set to position 2 and the 
variable resistor is adjusted to give a dc 
short circuit current of 300 mA. 

c) Switch /f is set to position 3 and switch 
Kto position b to apply the dc test voltage 
to the capacitor which is maintained 
until the voltmeter indicates approxi- 
mately zero for 3 to 5 seconds. 

d) Switch K is then set to position a again 
to apply the test voltage to the capacitor 
for a period of 3 min when the current 
is again recorded. 



The following conditions may be obtained: 

i) The ammeter / and the voltmeter U both 
indicate zero. In this case the fuse 
shall be checked. If it has blown, it 
shall be replaced. Then the voltage is 
applied to the capacitor and if the fuse 
blows again the procedure is interrupted* 
If the fuse does not blow, the procedure 
consisting in the application to the 
capacitor voltage as prescribed in items 
c) and d) above is continued using only 
the switch K; 

ii) The current indicated by the ammeter /is 
lower than 66 percent of the initial value 
and the voltmeter C/ indicates 1-3 C/n. 
The current shall indicate that at least 
one disconnector in the capacitor has 
interrupted. In this case the procedure is 
interrupted; 

iii) The current indicated by the ammeter 
/ is higher than 66 percent of the initial 
value. In this case the procedure is 
continued as per items (c) and (d). 

When the procedure is interrupted, the 
capacitor is cooled to the ambient temperature 
and the voltage test between terminals and 
container is carried out according to 10.1 of 
IS 13648 : 1992. 

The minimum short-circuit current of the N 
generator at the capacitor terminals is 2 000 A 
or as agreed between manufacturer and user. 

The rated current /f of the fuse shall be not 
less than 2/n. 



SELECTOR 
SWITCH O 



TIME LAG 
FUSE 




SELECTOR 
, SWITCH 



^CAPACITOR UNIT 
UNDER TEST 



Fig. 1 Circuit to Perform the Disconnecting Test 



IS 13580 : 1992 



12.2 Test Requirements 

At the conclusion of the test, the enclosure of 
each capacitor shall be intact except that 
normal operation of a vent, or minor damage 
of a case ( for example cracks ) is permitted 
provided the following are met: 

a) Escaping liquid material may wet the 
outer surface of the capacitor but shall 
not fall in drops; 

b) The container of the capacitor may be 
deformed and damaged but not broken; 

c) Flames and/or fiery particles shall not 
be emitted from the openings. This may 
be checked by enclosing the capacitor 
in gauze ( cheese cloth ). Burning or 
scorching of the gauze is then considered 
to be a criterion of failure; 

d) A voltage test shall be carried out in 
accordance with 10.1 of IS 13648 : 1992 

NOTE — Excessive emanation of fumes during the 
test could be dangerous 

13 GUIDE FOR FUSE AND DISCONNECTOR 
PROTECTION 

The fuse is connected in series with the element 



that the fuse is designed to isolate; if the 
element becomes faulty. After the breakdown 
of an element the fuse connected to it will 
blow and isolate it from the remaining part 
of the capacitor, which allows the unit to 
continue in service. The blowing of one or 
more fuses will cause voltage changes within 
the bank, when series connections is used. 

The voltage across sound unit(s) must not 
exceed the value given in the relevant standard. 

Depending on the internal connection of the 
units, the blowing of one or more fuses may 
also cause a change of voltage within the unit. 
The remaining elements in a series group will 
have an increased working voltage and the 
manufacturer shall, on request, give details of 
the voltage rise caused by blown fuses. 

Because of the self-healing properties of the 
capacitor, breakdowns are not dangerous and 
do not increase the current significantly. But, 
in the event of rising pressure ( for example 
caused by thermal instability, which may occur 
at the end of the capacitor, or in some cases, 
by an excessive number of self-healing break- 
down, caused by extreme overloads ) the self- 
healing power capacitor must be protected by 
an internal overpressure disconnector or 
equivalent devices. 



Siwidard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act^ 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder, Ihe Standard Mark 
on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been 
produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system 
of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and 
operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by 
BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under 
which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or 
producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards, 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act^ 1986 to 
promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality 
certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of thes; publications may be reproduced 
in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, 
in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type 
or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director 
( Publications ), BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if 
any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in 
possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be 
sent to BIS giving the following reference: 

Doc :No. ET29(3211 ) 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones: 331 01 31, 331 13 75 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
( Common to all OflSces ) 

Telephone 



C37 



Regional Offices : 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola 
CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 445-446. Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 6001 13 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri { East ) 
BOMBAY 400093 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. 
LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



f331 01 31 
{331 13 75 

37 84 99, 37 85 61 

86 26, 37 86 62 

C 53 38 43, 53 16 40 
{53 23 84 

C235 02 16, 235 04 42 
{235 15 19. 235 23 15 

f632 92 95, 632 78 58 
1632 78 91, 632 78 92 



Printed at Printwell Printers, Aligarh, India 



