**************** 



*■ *Z**K 





Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 

Jawaharlal Nehru 
Step Out From the Old to the New 



\\%*>*&&^^&s: 



Gauging practice [PGD 13: 




,_A» 




**************** 



BLANK PAGE 



<_<ii££ 





UJ> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 4025 : 2006 

yfrfcFT sRjf^T — ~m^ frfcT 

( ^w ^fftsm ) 

Indian Standard 
ROLLING BEARINGS — GAUGING PRACTICE 

(Second Revision) 



ICS 21.100.20 



© BIS 2006 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

April 2006 Price Group 4 



Bearings Sectional Committee, PG 13 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Bearings Sectional Committee had been approved by the Production and General Engineering Division 
Council. 

This standard was first published in 1967. The following major changes were made in first revision: 

a) Tapered roller, needle roller and thrust bearings have been included; 

b) Recommended taper values for the test mandrel have been changed from 1/4 000 - 1/5 000 to 1/5 000 - 
1/10 000; 

c) An additional method has been specified for measuring the radial run out of the inner and outer rings, 
covering the tapered roller and angular contact bearings; 

d) Method of measurement of the axial runout of the raceway with reference side of the inner ring has been 
changed; and 

e) Method of measurement of the axial runout of the raceway with reference side of the outer ring has been 
added. 

In this standard following changes have been further made to update the standard: 

a) Relative humidity has been added. 

b) Purpose of applying measuring load during the inspection of radial internal clearance has been added. 

c) Measuring weight has been added for the width checking of tapered roller bearings, radial and axial run 
out checking of ball and tapered roller bearings and the side face run out with respect to bore. 

d) Measurement of tapered bore has been added. 

e) Diameter under rollers for cylindrical roller bearings added. 

In the formulation of this standard, assistance has been derived from the following publications: 

JIS B 1515-1975 'Methods of measurement for rolling bearings', issued by the Japanese Industrial 
Standards Committee. 

ANSI B 3=4-1971 'Tolerance definitions and gauging practices for ball and roller bearings', issued by the 
American National Standards Institute. 



IS 4025 : 2006 

Indian Standard 
ROLLING BEARINGS — GAUGING PRACTICE 

(Second Revision) 



1 SCOPE 

This standard covers methods for measurement of 
dimensional accuracy, running accuracy and radial 
internal clearance of rolling bearings. 

1.1 Various gauging methods are in use to measure 
the dimensional and running accuracy of the 
bearings. The methods which commonly used by 
bearing users and manufacturers and which provide 
an accuracy sufficient for practical purposes have been 
covered. 

2 REFERENCE 

The following standard contains provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitutes provisions 
of this standard. At the time of publication, the edition 
indicated was valid. All standards are subject to 
revision and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent edition of the standard 
indicated below: 



IS No. 

2984 : 2003/ 
ISO 3650: 1998 



Title 

Slip gauges — Specification 
(second revision) 



3 GENERAL MEASURING CONDITIONS 

3.1 Cleaning 

Before starting the measurement, the bearings shall 
be thoroughly cleaned with white paraffin or mineral 
turpentine and dried. 

3.2 Gauging Equipment 

3.2.1 Slip Gauges (Gauge Blocks) 

The slip gauges shall conform to IS 2984. 

3.2.2 Indicators 

The indicators shall be with suitable calibration and 
of appropriate sensitivity and accuracy corresponding 



to the measuring conditions and the tolerance values 
for the bearings. Indicator selected shall have least 
count of approximately one-tenth of tolerance of 
parameter under measurement (0.001 or 0.01 mm as 
the case may be). 

3.2.3 Tolerances of Mandrel 

The radial run out of the tapered mandrels used for 
measuring the side run out of bore of radial run out of 
the bearings shall not exceed 2 um and shall be made 
smaller corresponding to the tolerance values for the 
bearings. In case of measurement of higher precision 
class bearings, mandrels run-out to be less than 1 um. 

The tapered mandrels for cylindrical bore shall have 
taper between 1/5 000 and 1/10 000. 

The basic taper of the mandrels for tapered bore 
shall be 1/12. Deviation from the basic taper shall be 
within ± 0.000 2. 

3.3 Measuring Temperature 

Before starting the measurement, the part to be 
measured and the measuring equipment shall be 
brought to 20 ± 1°C temperature. 

Relative humidity shall be maintained between 50 to 
60 percent. 

3.4 Reference Side 

The reference side shall be as stipulated by the 
manufacturer. 

3.5 Measuring Pressure and Radius of Gauge Tip 

The measuring pressure and the radius of the gauge 
tip shall be such that steady measured values can be 
obtained and the elastic deformation is as small as 
possible. 

Recommended values for the measuring pressure and 
the radius of the gauge tip, when measuring the bearing 
bore diameter and the outside diameter, are given 
below: 



Dimension 



Bearing bore 
diameter 



Bearing outside 
diameter 



Nominal Value of the Dimension 
mm 



Over 2.5 up to and including 10 
Over 10 up to and including 30 
Over 30 

Over 6 up to and including 30 
Over 30 



Measuring Pressure, 
Max, N 



2.0 
2.0 
3.0 

0.5 
2.0 



Radius of Gauge Tip 
Min, mm 



0.8 

2.5 
2.5 

2.5 
2.5 



IS 4025 : 2006 

3.6 Measuring Load for Running Accuracy 

The measuring^oad for running accuracy shall be such 
that repetitive readings are obtained without play 
between the steel balls or rollers and the raceways. 
Care shall be taken while applying the load to ensure 
that no deformation of the rolling elements or the track 
takes place. 

3.7 Measuring Load for Radial Internal Clearance 

The measuring load for radial internal clearance shall 
be of such magnitude as to permit obtaining 
steady readings. As the clearance is measured by 
applying a radial load the measured clearance for ball 
bearings is always slightly larger than the actual 
internal clearances due to the elastic deformation 
caused by measuring load. The actual internal 
clearance may be obtained by correcting the measured 
clearance to the amount of elastic deformation. 
Measuring load and the increase of clearance due to 
the load is given below: 



4.1.2 Width and Width Variation 

Keeping the outer ring free, support one side of 
the inner ring on 3 supporting points. The movement 
of the stylus shall be perpendicular to the reference 
plane passing though the supporting points. 
Apply an indicator to the other side directly above 
one supporting point. The width variation of an 
individual ring is the difference between the maximum 
and the minimum readings taken while rotating 
the outer ring for one complete revolution 
(see Fig. 2). 

4.2 Outer Ring 

4.2.0 The methods described are applicable to all 
types of rolling bearings. 

4.2.1 Bearing Outside Diameter 

The outside single diameter D of the bearing shall be 
measured between a flat surface and the mounted end 



Over 


Including 


Measuring Load 


RC Increase for Ball Bearings, in microns 


C2 


Normal 


C3 


C4 


10 


18 


24.5 N (2.5 kg) 


3 to 4 


4 


4 


4 


18 


50 


49 N (5 kg) 


4 to 5 


5 


6 


6 


50 


100 


147 N (15 kg) 


6 to 8 


8 


9 


9 



4 DIMENSIONAL ACCURACY 
4.1 Inner Ring 

4.1.0 The methods described are applicable to all 
types of rolling bearings. 

4. 1 . 1 Bearing Bore Diameter 

For measuring the single inside diameter d of the 
bearing use a 2-point gauge. The two measuring points 
shall be on a plane perpendicular to the axis of the 
bearing and opposite to each other. 



If the maximum and minimum single diameter 
readings are d Max and d Min respectively, the mean inside 
diameter d is given by the following formula: 



d = 



Max Mm 



If the size or section of the inner ring is such that with 
the bearing axis in a horizontal position the bore 
measurement is influenced by gravity or measuring 
load, or both, by more than 10 percent of the bore 
diameter tolerance, the bearing shall be placed with 
the axis in a vertical position and if necessary a lower 
measuring load used (see Fig. 1). 



2r — 




NOTE — Measurementofborediametertobeawayfromeither 
faces of ring by 2/*, where r is coordinate of corner radius in 
axial direction. 

Fig. 1 



IS 4025 : 2006 




SUPPORTING POINTS 

THREE POSITIONS ON 
CIRCUMFERENCE) 



Fig. 2 

of an indicator. If the maximum and minimum single 
diameter readings are D Um and D respectively, the 
mean outside diameter D m is given by the following 
formula: 



D = 



Max Mm 



If the size or section of the bearing outer ring is 
such that with the bearing axis in horizontal position 
the outside diameter measurement is influenced 
by gravity or measuring load or both, by more than 
10 percent of the outside diameter tolerance, the 
bearing shall be placed with the axis in a vertical 
position and, if necessary, the lower measuring load 
used (see Fig. 3). 





NOTE — Measurement of outer diameter of outer ring to be 
away from either side faces of ring by 2 R where R is coordinate 
of corner radius, on outer diameter, in axial direction. 

Fig. 3 

4.2.2 Width and Width Variation 

Keeping the inner ring free, support one side of 
the outer ring on 3 supporting points. The movement 
of the stylus shall be perpendicular to the 
reference plane passing though the supporting 
points. Apply an indicator to the other side directly 
above one supporting point. The width variation of 
an individual ring is the -difference between the 
maximum and the minimum readings taken while 
rotating the outer ring for one complete revolution 
(see Fig. 4). 




SUPPORTING POINTS 

"(THREE POSITIONS ON 

circumference) 

Fig. 4 



4.3 Total Bearing Width of Tapered Roller 
Bearings 

Apply an indicator in axial direction over the test 
weight placed on the outer ring's back face, placing 
the inner ring back face on a plane and keeping the 
rolling elements and the bearing rings in stable 
contact. Carry out the measurements at several 
approximately equiangular positions. The bearing 
width is given by the arithmetical mean of these 
measured values (see Fig. 5). 



MEASURING WEIGHT 




\V\W 



Fig. 5 



4.4 Height of Thrust Ball Bearings with Flat Seat 

Apply an indicator in axial direction to the shaft washer 
back face in the case of single direction thrust ball 
bearing and to the other housing washer back face in 
the case of double direction thrust ball bearing, placing 
the back face of the outer ring on the flat surface and 
keeping the rolling elements and the raceway tracks 
in position. Carry out the measurements at several 
approximately equiangular positions. The bearing 
height is given by the arithmetical mean of these 
measured values (see Fig. 6A and 6B). 

5 RUNNING ACCURACY 

5.1 Inner Ring and Outer Ring 

5.1.1 Radial Run Out 

5.1.1.1 Method I 

This method is applicable to cylindrical and needle 
roller bearings. Mount the bearing on a test mandrel 
and load the mandrel between 2 accurate centres or 



IS 4025 : 2006 




Fig. 6A 

suitable supports in such a way that it can be rotated. 
Apply an indicator to the middle of the width of 
stationary outer ring. The radial run out of inner ring 
is the difference between the maximum and minimum 
readings taken while rotating the mandrel for one 
complete revolution. Similarly rotate the outer ring 
for outer ring radial run out keeping the inner ring 
stationary (see Fig. 7). 

5.1.1.2 Method 2 

This method is applicable to single row deep groove 
ball bearings, single row angular contact ball bearings 
and tapered roller bearings. 

Support the outer ring and apply a uniform 
coaxial load to the reference side or the thrust side of 
the outer ring to ensure contact between the rolling 



£ 




t^ ^K>- S} 



-fer 



I^Sf 




R t = rotate inner ring with outer ring stationary 
R B = rotate outer ring with inner ring stationary 
S, = rotate inner ring with outer ring 
Fig. 7 

elements and raceways. Apply an indicator to the 
centre of the outer ring outside diameter. The radial 
run out of inner ring is the total indicator reading taken 
while rotating the mandrel for one complete revolution 
keeping the outer ring stationary. Similarly, keeping 
the mandrel stationary, rotate the outer ring and the 




yyz 



Fig. 6B 



total indicator reading is the outer ring radial run out 
(see Fig. 8). 

MEASURING 
WEIGHT 




Ae 
Jl 


JW 




m 



:R|R( 



Fig. 8A 



.MEASURING 
WEIGHT 




Rf Re 



Fig. 8B 

5.1.2 Axial Run Out and Face Run Out with Reference 
to Raceway 

Mount the bearing on a test mandrel and apply 
a uniform coaxial load and load the mandrel 
between two centres in such a way that it can be 
rotated. Apply an indicator on the top face of the 
outer ring. Axial run out/side face run out is the total 
indicator reading for one complete revolution of 
outer ring, when inner ring is kept stationary. 
Similarly, rotate the mandrel for one complete 
revolution keeping the outer ring stationary to 
obtain the inner ring axial run out (see Fig. 9, 10A, 
and 10B) side face run out with respect to 
raceway. 



IS 4025 : 2006 



.MEASURING 
WEIGHT 




Fig. 9 

5.1.3 Side Face Run Out of Inner Ring with Reference 
to Bore 

Mount the bearing on a test mandrel and load the 
mandrel between two accurate centres, in such a way 
that it can be rotated. Apply an indicator on the side 
face of inner ring (large face in case of TRB). Rotate 
the mandrel for one complete revolution, keeping the 
outer ring stationary. The total indicator reading is 
the side face run out of inner ring with respect to bore 
{see 'S' in Fig. 7, Fig. 10A and 10B). 



.MEASURING 
WEIGHT 




!3 



± 



)\ 




Fig. 10A 




5.2 Outside Cylindrical Surface Run Out with 
Reference Side 

Keeping the inner ring free, support the reference side 
of the outer ring on a flat serrated plate and hold 
against a stop located near the lower corner of 
the outside surface. Apply an indicator directly 
above the stop close to the upper corner of the outside 
surface. The run out is the difference between the 
maximum and the minimum readings taken while 
rotating the outer ring for one complete revolution 
(see Fig. 11). 



2r-, 




Wm> 



777777777777777, 



mz 



Fig. 1 1 



5.3 Raceway Run Out with Side of Thrust Ball 
Bearings with Flat Seat 

5.3.1 Raceway Run Out with Side of the Shaft Washer 
and Centre Shaft Washer 

Apply an indicator in axial direction to the bottom of 
the raceway groove directly above the supporting point 
set on a plane of the guide stops, supporting the back 
face of the shaft washer on three supporting points set 
on a plane and pressing the shaft washer bore to two 
guide stops set on the plane. The raceway run out 
with side of the shaft washer is the difference between 
the maximum and the minimum readings taken while 
rotating the shaft washer for one complete revolution, 
guiding with the guide stops {see Fig. 12). 



S = rotate inner ring with outer ring stationary 
Fig. 10B 




SK\\\\^ 



Fig. 12 



IS 4025 : 2006 



For centre shaft washers of double direction 
thrust ball bearings, measurements shall be carried 
out for both the raceway grooves in the same way 
as for shaft washers of single direction bearings, 
the inner part of the side face of the washer 
being supported on the supporting points (see 
Fig. 13). 



respective raceway and the rolling elements. The 
value of the radial clearance is the arithmetical 
mean of the unfixed ring in the direction of the 
measuring load at various angular positions of the 
ring and the rolling elements in relation to each other 
(see Fig. 15). 




x\\\\\\\\\\\\^ 



Fig. 14 



Fig. 13 



5.3.2 Raceway Run Out with Side of Housing 
Washer 

Apply an indicator in axial direction to the bottom 
of the raceway groove directly above the supporting 
point nearest to one of the guide stops, supporting 
the back face of the housing washer on three 
supporting points set on a plane and pressing the 
outside surface of the housing washer to two guide 
stops set on the plane. The raceway run out with 
side of the housing washer is the difference between 
the maximum and the minimum readings taken 
while rotating the housing washer for one complete 
revolution, guiding it with the guide stops (see 
Fig. 14). 

6 RADIAL INTERNAL CLEARANCE 

Fix the inner ring of the bearing to be measured 
on a flat plate with shims between the ring and the 
plate. Apply radially the measuring load specified 
in 3.7 to the unfixed ring alternately in directions 
A and B. While taking the measurements, care 
shall be taken to ensure contact between the 




k\\\m\\\\V 



NOTE — Shim thickness to be as low as possible (around 
0. 1 mm thick) to avoid twist during measurement. 

Fig. 15 

7 BORE DIAMETER (</) AND TAPER OF 
TAPERED BORE BEARINGS 

Normally apparatus arranged for two point 
measurement is used. Measure the diameters d, d b 
and <f a . Then, place the bearing on the table with the 
small bore side down and measure the distances h a 
and h b (see¥\g.\6). 

Taper 6 and bore diameter (d) can be calculated with 
the following formula: 



Taper measurement (G) = tan" 1 



d a ~d b 
2(h t -h b ) 



IS 4025 : 2006 



h b .d a - h a .d b 




Fig. 16 

8 DIAMETERS UNDER ROLLERS (INSCRIBED 
CIRCLE DIAMETER 'rfr') FOR NUS/RNU TYPE 
CYLINDRICAL ROLLER BEARINGS 



ring gauge or plug gauge alongwith the roller 
complement on a horizontal or vertical plane. 
Apply the indicator to the outer ring outside 
diameter at the centre of the width in radial 
direction. Apply sufficient radial load alternately 
on the outer ring in the same radial direction as that 
of the indicator and record the total indicator 
reading. By adding or subtracting this reading to 
the plug gauge, diameter dr can be obtained 
(see Fig. 17). 



MEASURING 
LOAD 




MEASURING 
LOAD 



PLUG GAUGE 



Normally, a master plug gauge is used. Fix the master 



Fig. 17 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and 
attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced ift any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing 
the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
'BIS Catalogue ' and ' Standards : Monthly Additions' . 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc: No. PG 13/BP 36/32 (0276). 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 


Date of Issue 


Text Affected 











BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 website : www.bis.org.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg r 2323 7617 

NEW DELHI 1 10002 12323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi r2337 8499, 2337 8561 

KOLKATA 700054 1 2337 £626, 2337 9 120 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 r260 3843 

1260 9285 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 r 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

12254 2519,2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) /2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 12832 7891 , 2832 7892 

Branches : AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. 
GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM. 



Printed at Simco Printing Press, Delhi 



