**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 13782 (1993) : Permeable sintered metal materials - 
Determination of fluid permeability [MTD 25: Powder 
Metallurgical Materials and Products] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 13782 : 1993 
ISO 4022 : 1987 

Reaffirmed 1999 

Indian Standard 

PERMEABLE SINTERED METAL MATERIALS — 
DETERMINATION OF FLUID PERMEABILITY 



UDC 669-138-8 :620-193-19 



©BIS 1993 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK 8HAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

June yB93 Price Qroup 5 



Powder Metallurgical Materials and Products Sectional Committee, MTD 25 



NATIONAL FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard which is identical with ISO 4022: 1987 'Permeable sintered metal 
materials — Determination of fluid permeability', issued by the International Organization for 
Standardization ( ISO ), was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendations 
of the Powder Metallurgical Materials and Products Sectional Committee ( MTD 25 ) and 
approval of the Metallurgical Engineering Division Council. 

The text of ISO Standard has been approved as suitable for publication as Indian Standard without 
deviations. Some terminology and conventions are, however, not identical with those used in 
Indian Standards. Attention is especially drawn to the following: 

a) Wherever the words 'International Standard' appear, referring to this standard, it should 
be read as 'Indian Standard'. 

b) Comma ( , ) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards the current 
practice is to use a point ( . ) as the decimal marker. 

In this adopted standard, reference appears to ISO 2738. The Indian Standard IS 5642 : 1991 
'Permeable sintered metal materials — Determination of density, oil content and open porosity 
( second revision )'. which is identical with ISO 2738 : 1987, is to be substituted in its place. 

In reporting the results of a test made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, 
observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
'Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised)'. 



IS 13782 : 1993 
ISO 4022 : 1987 



Indian Standard 

PERMEABLE SINTERED METAL MATERIALS — 
DETERMINATION OF FLUID PERMEABILITY 



1 Scope and field of application 

This International Standard specifies a method for the deter- 
mination of the fluid permeability of permeable sintered metal 
materials in which the porosity is deliberately continuous or in- 
terconnecting, testing being carried out under such conditions 
that the fluid permeability can be expressed in terms of viscous 
and inertia permeability coefficients (see annex A). 

This International Standard does not apply to very long hollow 
cylindrical test pieces of small diameter, in which the pressure 
drop of the fluid in passing along the bore of the cylinder may 
not be negligible compared with the pressure drop of the fluid 
passing through the wall thickness (see annex A, clause A. 5). 



2 Reference 

ISO 2738, Permeable sintered metal matenals ~ Determination 
of density, oil content and open porosity. 

3 Principle 

Passage of a test fluid of known viscosity and density through a 
test piece, and measurement of the pressure drop and the 
volumetric flow rate. 

Determination of the viscous and inertia permeability coeffi- 
cients, which are parameters of a formula describing the rela- 
tionship between the pressure drop, the volumetric flow rate, 
the viscosity and density of the test fluid, and the dimensions of 
the porous metal test piece permeated by this fluid. 



IS 13782: 1993 
ISO 4022: 1987 



4 Symbols and definitions 

For the purposes of this International Standard, the symbols and definitions given in the table apply: 

Table — Symbols and definitions 



Term 


Symbol 


Definition 


Unit 


Permeability 


— 


Ability of a porous metal to pass a fluid under the action of a 
pressure gradient 


- 


Test area 


A 


Area of a porous metal normal tc the direction of the fluid flow 


m2 


Thickness 


e 


Dimension of the test piece in the direction of fluid flow 

a) for flat test pieces: equal to the thickness 

b) for hollow cylinders: given by the equation in 6.1.2 


m 


Length 


L 


Length oi c\/\mder (see figure 2) 


m 


Viscous permeability coefficient 


^. 


Volume flow rate at which a fluid of unit viscosity is transmitted 
through unit area of porous metal permeated under the action of 
unit pressure gradient when the resistance to fluid flow is due only 
to viscous losses. It is independent of the quantity of porous metal 
considered. 


m2 


Inertia permeability coefficient 


^\ 


Volume flow rate at which a fluid of unit density is transmitted 
through unit area of porous metaf permeated under the action of 
unit pressure gradient when the resistance to fluid flow is due only 
to inertia losses. It is independent of the quantity of porous metal 
considered. 


m' 


Volume flow rate 


Q 


Mass flow rate of the fluid divided by its density 


m3/s 


Upstream pressure 
Downstream pressure 
Mean pressure 


Pi 
P 


Pressure upstrean of the test piece 

Pressure downstream of the test piece 

Half the sum of the upstream and downstream pressures 


N/m2 


Pressure drop 


Ap 


Difference between the pressures on the upstream and down- 
stream surfaces of the porous test piece 


N/m2 


Pressure gradient 


t^ple 


Pressure drop divided by the thickness of porous test piece 


N/m3 


Velocity 


QIA 


Ratio of the volumetric flow rate to the test area 


m/s 


Density 


Q 


Density of the test fluid at the mean temperature and pressure 


kg/m3 


Dynamic viscosity 


n 


Absolute dynamic viscosity coefficient as defined by Newton's law 


N.s/m2 


Apparatus correction (to be subtracted 
from the observed pressure drop) 




Pressure difference observed between the upstream and 
downstream pressure tappings when the test apparatus ^s used 
without a porous test piece in position. {It varies with the flow rate 
through the apparatus and arises from venturi effects at the 
pressure tappings and other causes) 


N/m2 


Mean absolute temperature 


T 


Half the sum of the temperatures of the fluid at the upstream side 
and the downstream side of the test piece 


K 



5 Test piece 

Before testing with gas, all liquid shall be removed fronn the 
pores of the test piece. Oil and grease shall be removed by 
using a suitable solvent with the extraction method given in 
ISO 2738. The test piece shall be dried before testing. 



6 Apparatus 

6.1 Equipment 

The choice of apparatus is mainly dictated by the size, shape 
and physical characteristics of the test piece. 



This Internationa! Standard refers to two different types of ap- 
paratus suitable for determining the fluid permeability of porous 
test pieces. 

6.1.1 Guard ring test head for flat test pieces 

This is a type of test apparatus which is recommended for 
carrying out non-destructive testing of partial areas of flat 
porous sheets. 

The permeable metal sheet is clamped between two pairs' of 
flexible seals. The inner pair, corresponding to the test area, 
has a mean diameter of D^. The outer pair, of mean diameter 
Z?2/ forms a guard ring surrounding the test-area, which is 



IS 13782: 1993 
ISO 4022: 1987 



pressurized to prevent side leakage from the test area (see 
figure 1). The width of the annulus formed by the guard ring 
test head shall be not less than the thickness of the sheet, i.e. : 



Do - D, 



> e 

Test fluid (for example air) from 
adjustable pressure-control valve 



The guard ring test head minimizes side leakage by ensuring 
that the pressure is the same in the inner and outer chambers. 
On the upperstream face of the test piece, this is achieved by 
arranging that the port area connecting the upper chambers (as 
shown in figure 1} is as large as possible. On the downstream 
face of the test piece, the inner chamber leads to a flowmeter, 
usually subject to a small back pressure, and the outer chamber 



{Alternative entry for test fluid) 



Port area as large as possible 



Outer seal 



Inner seal {'0' rings) 



Adjustable pressure- 
equalizing valve 




Air to 
atmosphere 



^1 
D2 

Q2 

Po 
P3 
P2 



Po 



- Mean diameter of the inner seals 

= Test head diameter 

= Volumetric flow rate, at pressure /?2 

= Atmospheric pressure 

= Downstream guard ring pressure, adjusted to be equal to P2 

= Pressure drop across flowmeter 



7-b 

Q 

T 
P 



1 



Lineb 



Flowmeter 



P\ ~ P2 ~ Pressure drop across porous metal 



''^'\/X/XX/j\ ^^^^ p'®c® 



/"a 
/'a=P2 



Line a 



Figure 1 ~ Guard ring test head 
3 



IS 13782 : 1993 
ISO 4022 : 1987 



leads to atmosphere via a pressure-equalizing valve. This valve 
is adjusted to equalize the pressure in the inner and outer 
chambers. The fitting of a restrictor between the test piece and 
the flowmeter, to increase the back pressure and thus permit 
more stable control of the pressure-equalizing valve. Is allowed. 

However, ideally, the pressure on the downstream face of the 
test piece should be as near as possible to atmospheric 
pressure and a restrictor should not be used unless necessary 
for the adjustment of the pressure drop in the flowmeter. 

Toroidal sealing rings ("0"-rings) are recommended for the 
inner seals. 

The seals shall be sufficiently flexible to overcome all surface 
imperfections and lack of flatness of the porous metal. In some 
instances it may be necessary to load the inner and outer seals 
separately to ensure leak-free sealing. 

Two upper and two lower seals are required and these shall be 
in line with each other. 



6.1.2 Jig for hollow cylindrical test pieces 

The permeability of hollow cylindrical test pieces is convenient- 
ly measured by clamping the cylinder axially between two flat 
surfaces and causing the test fluid to permeate outwards 
through the wall of the cylinder. An example is shown in 
figure 2. The flowmeter is placed upstream of the test piece. 
When clamping the porous metal cylinder under test, suffi- 
ciently flexible seals shall be used to overcome surface 
irregularities so as to ensure leak-free sealing, 

6.2 Test fluids 

In the majority of cases, gases are more convenient test fluids 
than liquids (see annex B). 

Test gases shall be clean and dry. 

By agreement between the interested parties, liquids may be 
used where the permeability with reference to a specific liquid 
is required. This liquid shall be clean and free from dissolved 
gases. 



Clamping force 



Line a 



Seal 




Test piece \//////r ^ 



Lineb 



7-a 

Q 

T 
[P 

Qb=Q2 
Tb 



NOTE — The diameter cIq should be approximately equal to diameter d and the 
distance h should be as small as possible to minimize the apparatus correction. 



Figure 2 — Jig for testing hollow cylindrical test pieces 

4 



IS 13782: 1993 
ISO 4022: 1987 



7 Procedure 



7.4 Measurement of pressures and temperatures 



7.1 Measurement of thickness and area of the 
test piece 

7.1.1 Flat test pieces 

The size of micrometer anvils shall not be larger than the size of 
the surface irregularities, nor smaller than the pore size. 

The test area is defined as that area normal to the direction of 
fluid flow, and, provided that the pressure gradient is uniform, 
this definition is meaningful and the test area is readily 
measured. 

7.1.2 Hollow cylindrical test pieces 

For hollow cylinders, the thickness e and the test area A are 
given by the following relationships: 



/?2 


- D, 
2 

D X 


> e 

(In r)2 






e ~ 


2{r 


- \) 






A = 


n X 


D X L 


X 


Inr 



r - 1 



D 



where r = — (see figure 2) 
d 



D ~ d 
When the wall thickness is small compared with d, for 

example less than 0,1 d, the thickness e and test area A are 
given by the following equations: 



It is necessary to measure the pressure and temperature at the 
flowmeter and the test piece in order to 

— correct the reading of the flowmeter; 

— calculate the mean flow rate through the test piece; 

— determine the density and the viscosity of the test fluid. 



8 Expression of results 

8.1 Mean flow rate 

The reading of the flowmeter Qf is corrected if it is not being 
used at its calibration pressure and temperature, by using the 
flowmeter correction factor Cf given by the manufacturer. The 
corrected flowmeter reading Q^ is given by the following equa- 
tion: 

Qa= CfX Qf 

The corrected flowmeter reading Q^ is converted to the mean 
fk)w rate Q within the porous test piece using the correction 
term Q, which can be calculated from the gas law equation : 



Cs = 



The mean flow rate is Q = Q x Qg. 

When tabulating data, it is convenient to use the overall correc- 
tion factor Cq: 



Cq - Cf X Cg 



D ~ d 



e = 



to obtain the mean flow rate Q = C^ x Q^. 



n X L X {D -^ d) 



7.2 Measurement of pressure drop 

The pressure drop may be determined either by measuring the 
upstream and downstream pressures separately and taking the 
difference or by using a differential pressure gauge. 

The apparatus correction is obtained by using the equipment 
with no test piece in place and observing the pressure drop over 
the required range of flow rates. The apparatus correction 
should preferably not exceed 10 % of the pressure drop (see 
the table). 



8.2 Mean density and viscosity 

The mean pressure and the mean absolute temperature within 
the test piece will enable mean density and mean viscosity to be 
obtained from published data. 

8.3 Calculation of results 

The viscous and inertia permeability coefficients are determined 
by taking a number of simultaneous flow rate and pressure 
drop readings. The number of flow rate readings shall be at 
least five, equally spaced within an interval of flow rate 
readings where the highest is at least ten times greater than the 
lowest. 



7.3 Measurement of flow rate 

A primary standard for the measurement of the flow rate of the 
test fluid is preferred. The flow rate shall be corrected to the 
mean pressure and temperature of the test piece. However, a 
standard flowmeter (previously calibrated against a primary 
standard) may be more convenient to use. 



The results are processed using the following equation: 



Ap X A 1 Q ^ P 1 

— X — + 

W\ A X rj y/^ 



e X Q X ri 
[see annex A, equation {2)1. 



!S 13782: 1993 
ISO 4022 : 1987 



This equation can be re-written in the form y - ax + b where 

Ap x A 
c X Q X rj 

Q X Q 



A X rj 



The values x and y are calculated at each level of flow 
rate/pressure drop. The corresponding values of x and y are 
plotted on linear graph paper and the straight line which best 
fits the points is drawn. 

The intercept of this line on the >'-axis gives the reciprocal of 
the viscous pernneability (l/t/Zy). 

The slope of this line gives the reciprocal of the inertia 
permeability iVw). 

In case of doubt, the straight line should be determined by the 
least-squares method. 

NOTE — If measurement is made with flow in the laminar regime, only 
the viscous permeability coefficient can be determined (see annex A). 



8.4 Final result 

Report of the viscous permeability coefficient in 10 ^^ fx^i 
(1 pm2) and the inertia permeability coefficient in 10 ^ m 
{^ pm). to an accuracy of ± 5 % in relative value. 

NOTE - The unit of viscous permeabilitv coefficient (micrometre 
squared) is sometimes called a darcy. 



9 Test report 

The test report shall include the following information. 

a) reference to this Internationa! Standard; 

b) all details necessary for identification of the test 
sample; 

c) the type of apparatus used; 

d) the test fluid used; 

e) the result obtained; 

f) all operations not specified by this international Stan- 
dard or regarded as optional; 

g) details of any occurrence which may have affected the 
result. 



IS 13782: 1993 
ISO 4022 : 1987 



Annex A 
The flow of fluid through porous materials 

(Thi3 annex does not form an integral part of the Standard.) 



A.I Viscous flow 

The empirical formula for the flow of fluids through porous materials was first given by Darcy, following experiments with water, and 
expresses the proportionality between the pressure drop per unit thickness and the flow rate per unit area and the viscosity. It can be ' 
written 

Ap Q ^ n 

e A X tj/^ 

and assumes that the losses are all due to viscous shear. 



A. 2 Viscous and inertia flow 

In reality, the flow of fluid through porous materials can involve several mechanisms, many of which can be operating simultaneously. 
However, experience shows that in the majority of cases involving the flow of fluids through porous metals only three mechanisms are 
usually involved. They are: viscous flow, inertia flow and slip flow. Inertia flow concerns the loss of energy due to the changes in the 
direction of the fluid in passing through tortuous porosity and to the onset of local turbulences in the pores, and has been combined 
with the viscous loss equation of Darcy by Forchheimer to give the equation (slip flow usually absent) 

Ap Q ^ n Q^ ^ Q 

= + (2) 

which is used in 8.3 of this International Standard. However, at low velocities of flow [Ql A ) of viscous fluids, the inertia term of equa- 
tion (2) is usually insignificant compared with the viscous term and can be ignored to give the simpler equation (1). 

A. 3 Slip flow 

Equation (1) assumes that the pore size is large compared with the mean free path of the molecules of the test fluid. This assumption 
is most likely to be invalid with a very small pore size and with gases at reduced pressure or high temperature. When the mean free 
path of the gas molecules approaches the same order of size as the pores of the metal, slip flow occurs. When slip flow is present, the 
porous metal appears to be more permeable than when slip flow is absent. Also, when slip flow is present, inertia losses are usually 
absent, so that equation (2) may be written in the form 

^ X // X e 

^^ ^ ~A 1 ■ ■ *3^ 

/I X A/7 

where t//^ is the permeability coefficient with slip flow present. 
The correction for slip flow is given by 
2 X /? 



t/y, - w^y- 1 + 



Pi t P2 



where 



^//^ is the observed viscous permeability with slip flow present; 

v/v is the true viscous permeability coefficient; 

B is the Klinkenberg factor, which is a constant for a given gas and porous material, and has the dimensions of a pressure. 



IS 13782: 1993 
ISO 4022: 1987 



This relationship between t/Zg and v^^ may be re-written in the form 



- + t^v 



(//g = 5 X (//^ X I \ + W^f ... (5) 

Pi + P2 

2 

Hence, by measuring (//.over a range of different pressures (i.e., p^ and/72) by plotting ^g against astraight line is obtained. 

P^ + P2 
The slope of this line is equal to B x i//^. The intercept of this line on the ^g-axis is equal to the viscosity permeability v^^. 

The value of the Klinkenberg factor. B increases with decreasing pore size, decreasing relative molecular mass, and increasing 

temperature and viscosity of the gas. 

A. 4 Wall and end effects 

Equation (2), relating to the flow of fluids, assumes that the porosity is uniformly continuous, whereas at the surfaces of a test piece 
discontinuities occur. There are two cases to consider: 

— the wall effect for test pieces edge-sealed into a container; 

— the end effect at the upstream and downstream surfaces of all test pieces. 

In general with granular materials, if the diameter of the test piece is not less than about 100 times the diameter of the particles com- 
prising the porous metal, the wall effect is usually negligible and with a test piece diameter of about 40 times the particle diameter, the 

error is less than about 5 %. 

End effects are usually negligible when the test piece thickness is not less than 10 times the diameter of the particles comprising the 
porous metal. As in the case of the wall effect, the end effect also depends upon the difference between the porosity at the surface 
and the internal porosity. 

A. 5 Long tubes of porous materials 

Equation (2) {see A. 2) and the calculation of area and thickness in 7.1.2, as well as the measurement of the pressure drop in 7.2, 
assume that the upstream pressure is uniform for all parts of the specimen. With long small bore tubes this assumption may not be 
valid. To establish that the error caused by the fall in pressure of the fluid along the bore of the tube is less than 5 %, the following 

procedures can be used: 

a) Insert a second pressure tapping at the end furthest from the fluid iniet, and compare this value with the value obtained from 
the pressure tapping nearest to the fluid inlet. 

b) Mask about half of the area of the tube from one end. Measure the permeability of this masked tube when the unmasked por- 
tion is 

— nearest to 

— farthest from 

the fluid inlet end. Compare the two measured permeabilities. 



IS 13782: 1993 
ISO 4022 : 1987 



Annex B 
Test fluids 

(This annex does not form an integral part of the Standard,} 

In the majority of cases, gases are more convenient test fluids than liquids. The problems with liquids are the foHovving: 

— it is more difficult to remove all solid particles which could be captured by the porosity of the porous metal and thereby 
change the permeability; 

— dissolved gases may be precipitated within the pores, causing "gas locks" to occur; 

— static heads of liquid may add difficulty in measuring the pressure drop; 

— liquids are more expensive and messy to work with; 

— some metals can have an adsorptive reaction with some liquids, whereby the pore size tends to be reduced; 

— owing to capillary and surfactant effects, the degree of surface wetting of the pore surface by the liquid can effect the ob- 
served permeability, especiaiiy with porous metals of small pore size. 

However, in rare cases liquids may be used where the permeability with respect to a specific liquid is required, provided that it is a 
Newtonian liquid and the following precautions are observed ; 

— the liquid must be free of solid particles and dissolved gases; 

— the whole of the porous metal must be filled with the liquid and no pockets of gas shall be allowed to form either on the sur- 
faces or in the pores of the porous metal test pieces. 

In general, liquids will only give permeability results concordant with those obtained from gases when the pore size is large. For all 
these reasons, gases are the preferred test fluids. 

However, with gases inertia losses are more likely to be present and hence equation (2) of annex A is more likely to be required. 



Primed at Dee Kay Priiiten, New Delhi, India 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 19S6 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark 
on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been 
produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system 
of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and 
operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by 
BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under 
which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or 
producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards, 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to 
promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality 
certification of goods and attenting to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced 
in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, 
in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type 
or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director 
(Publications ), BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards 
are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review 
indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken 
up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the 
latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 'BIS Handbook' and 'Standards 
Monthly Additions'. Comments on this Indian Standard maybe sent BIS giving the following 
reference: 

Doc : No. MTD 25 ( 3400 ) 

Aendments Issued Since Publication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text AflFected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 11002 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

( Common to all Offices ) 

Regional Offices : Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 

NEW DELHI 11002 
Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola r37 84 99, 37 85 61 

CALCUTTA 700054 |37 86 26, 37 86 62 

f 53 38 43, 53 16 40 
Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 < 33 23 §4 

r235 02 16, 235 04 42 
Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 i 235 15 19 235 23 15 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) f632 92 95, 632 78 51 

BOMBAY 400093 |632 78 91 , 632 78 92 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. 
LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



r3310131 
1331 13 75 

(.37 



Printed at Printwell Printers, Aligarh, India 



