**************** 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live'' 


IS  650  (1991):  Specification  for  Standard  Sand  for  Testing 
of  Cement  [CED  2:  Cement  and  Concrete] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New" 


aj^&vi  iJii^s:y>K^  isb^^ni^seg 


:<>5&i|  mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 


K^^^iXSVCd^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangarara  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


^'^^^r 


k 


BLANK  PAGE 


^*-^^^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


IS  650  :  1991 

(Reafflnned1999) 

REAFFIRMED 

(  f^'^^T  'T^Tt^m  ) 

Indian  Standard 

STANDARD  SAND  FOR  TESTING  CEMENT  — 

SPECIFICATION 

f  Second  Revision  J 


Fourth  Reprint  NOVEMBER  2002 


UDC  553.623.666.942 


®  BIS  1991 

BUREAU   OF  INDIAN   STANDARDS 

MANAK  BHAVAN,     9     BAHADUR  SHAH  ZAFAR  MARG 
NEW  DELHI  110002 

^''y  1991  Price  Group  2 


IS  650 :  1991 


Cement  and  Concrete  Sectional  Committee,  CED  2 


Representing 
In  personal  capacity  (  University  ofRoorkeee^  Roorkee  247  667  ) 


Orissa  Cement  Limited,  New  Delhi 

The  Associated  Cement  Companies  Ltd,  Bombay 

Central  Public  Works  Department,  New  Delhi 


Cfmrman 
Db  H.  C.  Visvbsvabaya 

Members 

Shbi  H.  Bhattachabya 
Db  a.  K.  Ghattebjeb 

Shbi  S.  H.  Subbamanian  (  Alternate  ) 
Chief  Enginebu  (  Designs  j 

Superintending  Enginbeb 

(  B&S  )  (  Alternate  ) 
Chief  Engineeb,  Navagam  Dam  Sardar  Sarovar  Narmada  Nigam  Ltd,  Gandhinagar 

Supebintending  ENQiifEER,  Q,CC  (  Alternate  ) 
Chief  Engineeb  (  Resbaboh-cum-Diregtob  )   Irrigation  and  Power  Research  Institute,  Amritsar 

Research  Officer  (  Concrete- 
Technology  )  (  Alternate  ) 
DiBECTOB  A.  .P.  Engineering  Research  Laboratories,  Hyderabad 

Joint  Dibectob  (  Alternate  ) 
DiBBCTOB  (  G  &  MOD  )  (  N  &  W  )  Central  Water  Commission,  New  Delhi 

Deputy  Dibectob  (  C  &  MDD)  (N  W  &  S  ) 
(  Alternate  ) 

Hyderabad  Industries  Limited,  Hyderabad 


Structural  Engineering  Research  Centre  (  GSIR  ),  Ghaziabad 
The  India  Cements  Ltd,  Madras 

Gannon  Dunkerley  &  Company  Limited,  Bombay 
Central  Building  Research  Institute  (  CSIR  ),  Roorkee 


Shbi  K.  H.  Gangwal 

Shbi  V.  Pattabhi  (  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  V.  K,  Ghanekab 
Shbi  S.  GopiNath 

Shri  R.  TamilakaraN  (  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  S.  K.  Guha  Thakubta 

Shbi  S.  P.  Sankaranarayanan 
(  Alternate ) 
Db  Ibshad  Masood 

Dr  Md  Khalid  (  Alternate  ) 

Joint  Director,  Standards  (  B  &  S)  {  CB-I  )  Research,  Designs  &  Standards  Organization  (  Ministry  of  Railways  ), 

Lucknow 

Joint  Director  Standards  (  B  &  S  ) 
(  CB-II  )  (  Alternate) 
Shri  N.  G.  Joshi 

Shbi  P.  D.  Kelkab  (  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  D.  K.  Kanungo 

Shbi  B.  R.  Meena  (  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  P.  Kbishnamurthy 

Shbi  S.  Chakravarthy  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  G.  K.  Majumdar 

Sbri  S.  O.  Rangari  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  P.  N.  Mehta 

Sbri  J.  S,  Sanganebia  (  Alternate  ) 
Member  Secretary 

Dibectob  Civil  f  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  M.  K.  Mukhebjee 


Shbi  M,  K.  Ghosh  (  Alternate  ) 
Db  A.  K.  Mullick 

Dr  S.  C.  Ahluwalia  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  Nibmal  Singh 

Shbi  S.  S.  Miglani  (  Alternate) 
Shri  R.  C.  Pabate 

Lt-Col  R.  K.  Singh  (  Alternate) 
Shbi  H.  S.  Pasricha 
Shri  Y.  R.  Phull 

Shbi  S.  S  Seehra  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  Y,  R.  Phull 

Shri  K.  B.  Thandevan  {  Alternate  ) 
Dr  M.  RaMaiah 

Dr  a.  G.  Madhava  Rao  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  6.  Ramdas 
Representative 
Shri  A.  U.  Rijhsinghani 

Shbi  C.  S.  Sharma  (  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  J.  Sen  Gupta 

Shri  A.  K.  Lal  (  Alternate ) 
Shri  T.  N.  Subba  Rao 

Shri  S-  A.  Reddi  (  Alternate  ) 
Superintendent  Enginbeb  (  Designs  ) 

ExEcrTivB  Engineer,   S.  M.  R.  Division 
(  Alternate  ) 


Indian  Hume  Pipes  Co  Ltd,  Bombay 

National  Test  House,  Calcutta 

Larsen  and  Toubro  Limited,  Bombay 

Hospital  Services  Consultancy  Corporation  (  India  )  Ltd,  New  Delhi 

Geological  Survey  of  India,  Calcutta 

Central  Board  of  Irrigation  and  Power,  New  Delhi 

Roads   Wing,    Department   of  Surface  Transport  (  Ministry  of  Trans- 
port ),  New  Delhi 

National  Council  for  Cement  and  Building  Materials,  New  Delhi 

Development     Commissioner*  for     Cement    Industry    (  Ministry     of 
Industry  ) 


Engineer-in-Chief*s  Branch,  Army  Headquarters 

Hindustan  Prefab  Ltd,  New  Delhi 

Central  Road  Research  Institute  (  CSIR  ),  New  Delhi 

Indian  Roads  Congress,  New  Delhi 

Structural  Engineering  Research  Centre  (  CSIR  ),  Madras 

Directorate  General  of  Supplies  and  Disposals,  New  Delhi 

Builders  Association  of  India,  Bombay 

Cement  Corporation  of  India  Limited,  New  Delhi 

National  Buildings  Organization,  New  Delhi 

Gammon  India  Limited,  Bombay 

Public  Works  Department,  Government  of  Tamil  Nadu 


(  Continued  on  page  3 


IS  650  :  1991 


(  Continued  from  page  2  ) 

Members 

Sbbi  S.  B,  Suri 

Sbki  N.  Chandrasekaran  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  H.  G.  Visvesvaraya 

Shbi  D.  G.  Chatttjrvedi  (  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  G.  Raman, 

Director  (  Civ  Engg  ) 


Representing 
Central  Soil  and  Materials  Research  Station,  New  Delhi 
The  Institution  of  Engineers  (  Ijidia  ),  Calcutta 
Director  General,  BIS  (  Ex-officio  Member  ) 


Secretary 

Shri  N.  G.  Bandyopadhyay 
Joint  Director  (  Civ  Engg  ),  BIS 

Cement,  Pozzolana  and  Cement  Additives  Subcommittee,  GED  2  :  1 


Convener 

Dr  H.  C.  Visvesvaraya 

Members 

Sbbi  S.  K.  Bai^erjee 
Shbi  Somnath  Banebjee 
Shbi  N.  G.  Basak 

Shbi  T.  MadUeshwar  (  Alternate ) 
Chief  Engineer  (  Rbseaech-ctjm  Director 

Research  OrFicsR  (  CT  )  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  N.  B.  Desai 

Shbi  J.  K.  Patel  (  Alternate  ) 
Director 

Research  Officer  (  Alternate  ) 
Dibectob  (  C  &  MDD  II  ) 

Deputy  Director    (  C  &  MDD  II  ) 
(  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  R.  K.  Gattani 

Shri  R.  K.  Vaishnavi  (  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  P.  J.  Jaqus 

Dr  a.  K,  Chatterjeb  [Alternate) 
Joint  Director  (  Materials  ) 

Asstt  Director  (  Plastic  )  (  Alternate  ) 
Joint  Director,  Standards  B  &  S  (  GB-I ) 

Joint   Director,    Standards  (  B  &  S  ) 
(  CB-II  )  (  Alternate) 
Shbi  W.  N,  Karode 
Sbbi  R.  Kunjithapattam 
Shbi  G.  K,  Majumdar 
Dr  Ipshad   Masood 
Shbi  K.  P.  Mohideen 
Shri  M.  K.  MukherJee 

Shri  M,  K.  Ghosh  (  Alternate  ) 
Dr  a.  K.  Mullick 

Dr  (  Smt  )  S.  Laxmi  {Alternate) 
Sbbi  K.  Naranappa 

Shri  D.  P*  Kewalramani  (  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  Niumal  S;ngh 

Shri  S.  S.  Miglani  (  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  Y.  R.  Phull 

Shbi  S.  S.  Seehra  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  A.  V.  Ramana 

Dr  K.  G.  Narang  (  Alternate  ) 
Col  V.K.  Rao 

Shri  N.  S,  Galande  (  Alternate  ) 
Shri  S.  A.  Reddi 
Shbi  A.  U.  Rijhsinghani 
Shbi  M.  P.  Singh 
Superintending  Engineer  (D) 

Senior     Deputy     Chief     Engineer 
(  General  )  (  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  S,  H.  Subi 

Shbi  N.  Ghandrasekaran  (  Alternate) 
Shbi  L.  Swaroop 

Shri  H.  Bhattachabya  (  Alternate  ) 
Shbi  V.  M.  Wad 


In  personal  capacity  (  University  of  Roorkee,  Roorkee  247  667  ) 

National  Test  House,  Calcutta 

Cement  Manufacturers  Association,  Bombay 

Directorate  General  of  Technical  Development,  New  Delhi 

)   Irrigation  Department,  Government  of  Punjab 

Gujarat  Engineering  Research  Institute,  Vadodara 

Maharashtra  Engineering  Research  Institute,  Nasik 

Central  Water  Commission,  New  Delhi 

Shree  Digvijay  Cement  Co  Ltd,  Bombay 

The  Associated  Cement  Companies  Ltd,  Bombay 

Naticnal  Buildings  Organization,  New  Delhi 

Research,    Designs     and    Standards    Organization     (  Ministry      of 
Railways  ),  Lucknow 

The  Hindustan  Construction  Co  Ltd,  Bombay 
Chattinad  Cement  Corporation  Ltd,  Poliyur,  Tamil  Nadu 
Hospital  Services  Consultancy  Corporation  (  India  )  Ltd,  New  Delhi 
Central  Building  Research  Institute  (  GSIR  ),  Roorkee 
Central  Warehousing  Corporation,  New  Delhi 

Roads   Wing,     Department   of    Surface     Transport       (  Ministry    of 
Transport  ),  New  Delhi 

National  Council  for  Cement  and  Building  Materials,  New  Delhi 

Central  Electricity  Authority,  New  Delhi 

Development    Commissioner     for     Cement     Industry    (  Ministry   of 
Industry  ) 

Central  Road  Research  Institute  (  CSIR  ),  New  Delhi 

Dalmia  Cement  (  Bharat )  Ltd,  New  Delhi 

Engineer-in-Chief*s  Branch,  Army  Headquarters 

Gammon  India  Limited,  Bombay 

Cement  Corporation  of  India  Limited,  New  Delhi 

Federation  of  Mini  Cement  Plants,  New  Delhi 

Public  Works  Department,  Government  of  Tamil  Nadu 

Central  Soil  and  Materials  Research  Station,  New  Delhi 
Orissa  Cement  Limited,  New  Delhi 
Bhilai  Steel  Plant,  Bhilai 


AMENDMENT  NO.  1    MAY  2000 

TO 

IS  650  :  1991    STANDARD  SAND  FOR  TESTING 

CEMENT  —  SPECIFICATION 

(  Second  Reviaon  ) 

( Page  1,  clause  A2)  —  Insert  the  following  in  the  note: 

'In  each  fracdon,  retentioa  on  the  larger  sieve  size  aad  passing  through  the  smaller  sieve  size  to  a 
maximum  amount  of  1  percent  may  be  permitted.' 

(CED2) 


Reprography  Unit,  BIS,  New  Delhi,  India 


Cement  and  Concrete  Sectional  Committee,  CED  2 


FOREWORD 

This  Indian  Standard  (  Second  Revision  )  was  adopted  by  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards,  after  the 
draft  fiaalized  by  the  Cement  and  Concrete  Sectional  Committee  had  been  approved  by  the  Civil 
Engineering  Division  Council. 

As  a  standard  fine  aggregate  used  for  assessing  the  quality  of  cement,  standard  sand  plays  a  very 
important  role  in  the  cement  industry.  The  importance  of  a  standard  sand  in  industrial  economy  is 
evident  from  the  fact  that  it  is  required  not  only  as  a  testing  material  in  the  cement  industry  but  also 
as  a  standard  material  to  study  the  properties  of  other  building  materials  like  lime  and  pozzolanas, 
various  admixtures  to  cement  and  also  as  a  standard  material  for  determining  the  abrasive  resistance 
of  different  substances,  such  fis  building  stones.  Till  the  year  1955,  the  country's  requirements  for 
standard  sand  were  met  by  importing  Leighton-Buzzard  sand  from  the  United  Kingdom.  The  difficul- 
ties and  expense  of  importing  this  standard  sand  from  UK  led  to  an  investigation  to  replace  Leighton- 
Buzzard  sand  by  an  Indian  Standard  sand. 

While  formulating  the  standard  for  Portland  cement,  the  Committee  also  felt  the  necessity  of  establish- 
ing an  indigenous  standard  sand  as  early  as  possible.  As  a  result  of  extensive  survey  and  research  carried 
out  by  many  organizations,  namely.  Geological  Survey  of  India;  Industrial  Research  Bureau;  National 
Test  House;  Concrete  aftd  Soil  Research  Laboratory,  Chepauk,  Madras;  Hirakud  Research  Station; 
Hyderabad  Engineering  Research  Laboratory;  the  laboratories  of  the  Associated  Cement  Companies 
Ltd;  and  Dr  Lai  C.  Verman,  it  was  found  that  the  white  variety  of  sand  available  at  Ennore,  Madras 
State,  was  .very  pure  in  nature  and  suitable  for  use  as  a  standard  sand.  The  thoroughly  washed  sand 
passing  850-micron  IS  Sieve  and  retained  on  600-micron  IS  Sieve  was  observed  to  satisfy  the  require- 
ments of  standard  sand  as  a  substitute  for  the  imported  sand.  Accordingly,  the  Sectional  Committee 
formulated  IS  650  :  1955  which  reccmmehded  Ennore  sand  passing  850-micron  IS  Sieve  and  not  more 
than  10  percent  by  mass  passing  600-micron  IS  Sieve.  This  grading  was  the  same  as  that  for  Leighton- 
Buzzard  sand. 

la  the  light  of  experience  gained  with  the  practical  use  of  Indian  Standard  sand  (  conforming  to 
IS  650:  1955)  for  testing  the  compressive  and  tensile  strength  of  Indian  cement  over  the  period, 
pertain  drawbacks  observed  in  respect   of  compressive   and  tensile  strength  values,  the  quantity 

of  gauging  water  aiftl  trie  reproducibility  of  results.  The  Sectional  Committee  was  of  the  view  that 
these  drawbacks  could  be  overcome  by  revising  the  grading  of  Ennore  sand.  On  the  recommendations 
of  the  Sectional  Committee,  the  Council  of  Scientific  and  Industrial  Research  sponsored  the  scheme 
of  investigations  on  *Mortar  making  properties  of  Ennore  sand'  to  be  carried  out  at  the  Concrete  and 
Soil  Research  Laboratory,  Madras  under  the  guidance  of  the  then  ISI  with  the  following  main 
objects: 

a)  To  determine  the  optimum  grading  of  Ennore  sand  which  would  give  the  highest  strength 
keeping  at  the  same  time,  the  yield  from  the  quarry  as  high  as  possible;  and 

b)  To  introduce  one  or  more  intermediate  size  requirement  in  the  grading  specification  with  a 
view  to  controlling  uniformity  of  grading  and  thus  to  ensure  better  reproducibility  of 
results. 

As  a  result  of  the  above  investigations,  and  on  the  recommendations  of  the  Concrete  and  Soil 
Research  Laboratory,  Madras,  the  Sectional  Committee  decided  to  revise  the  grading  of  Ennore  sand 
to  make  it  more  suitable  from  the  technical  and  exploitation  point  of  view  and  also  to  bring  it  in  line 
with  the  RILEM  CEMBUREAU  grading  of  sand  for  testing  of  cement  recommended  by  the  Interna- 
tional Organization  for  Standardization  ( ISO  ).  First  revision  of  the  standard  was  printed  in  1966 
mainly  with  a  view  to  incorporating  the  revised  grading  of  standard  sand. 

The  Sectional  Committee  records  its  deep  appreciation  to  all  those  who  have  assisted  in  the  impor- 
tant investigations  related  to  regrading  of  the  standard  sand  and  in  particular  to  the  Concrete  and 
Soil  Research  Laboratory,  Madras;*  the  Central  Road  Research  Institute,  New  Delhi;  Engineering 
Research  Laboratory,  Hyderabad;  Maharashtra  Engineering  Research  Institute,  Nasik;  and  the 
laboratories  of  various  cement  factories  in  the  country. 

( Continued  on  third  cover  ) 


(  Continued  from  second  cover ) 

This  revision  has  been  taken  up  with  a  view  to  incorporating  various  amendments  issued  to  this 
standard  from  time  to  time  in  view  of  changes  required  in  clauses  on  source  of  standard  sand,  pack- 
ing and  marking. 

For  the  purpose  of  deciding  whether  a  particular  requirement  of  this  standard  is  complied  with,  the 
final  value,  observed  or  calculated,  expressing  the  result  of  a  test  or  analysis,  shall  be  rounded  off  in 
accordance  with  IS  2  :  1960  'Rules  for  rounding  off  numerical  values  (  revised  )\  The  number  of  signi- 
ficant places  retained  in  the  rounded  off  value  should  be  the  same  as  that  of  the  specified  value  in  this 
standard. 


IS  650: 1991 


Indian  Standard 

STANDARD  SAND  FOR  TESTING  CEMENT 

SPECIFICATION 

(  Second  Revision  ) 


1  SCOPE 

This  standard  lays  down  requirements  for  Stan- 
dard sand  used  in  testing  of  cement. 

2  REFERENCES 

The  Indian  Standards  listed  below  are  neces- 
sary adjuncts  to  this  standard: 

IS  No.  Title 

265  :  1987  Hydrochloric     acid    (  third 

revision  ) 

460  Test     sieves  :  Part    I    Wire 

(  Part  1  ) :  1985     cloth     test      sieves    (  third 
revision  ) 

10036  Jute  canvas  :  General  requi- 

(  Part  2  )  :  1982     rements 

3  SOURCE 

The  standard  sand  shall  be  obtained  from 
Ennore,  Tamil  Kadu.  Particle  size  greater  than 
1  mm  of  the  Standard  sand  may  also  be  obtain- 
ed tVom  Mudaliarkuppam,  Tamil  Nadu  ( see 
Note  ). 

NOTE  —  Supplies  of  the  standard  sand  may  be 
obtained  from  Tamil  Nadu  Minerals  Ltd.  3K  Kama- 
vajar  Salai,  TWAD  Board  Buildings,  Chepauk, 
Madras  600  005. 

4  PHYSICAL  CHARACTERISITICS 

4.1  The  standard  sand  shall  be  of  quartz,  light 
grey  or  whitish  variety  and  shall  be  free  from 
silt.  The  sand  grains  shall  be  angular,  the  shape 
of  the  grains  approximating  to  the  spherical 
form;  elongated  and  flattened  grains  being  pre- 
sent only  in  very  small  or  negligible  iquantities. 

4.2  The  standard  sand  shall  (  100  percent  ) 
pass  through  2-mm  IS  sieve  and  shall  be  (  lOO 
percent )  Tetained  oi\  90-micron  IS  Sieve  with 
the  following  particle  size  distribution: 

Particle  Size  Percent 

Smaller  than  2  mm   and   grea-        33*33 
ter  than  \  mm 


Particle  Size  Percent 

Smaller  than  1  mm  and  greater       33*33 
than  500  microns 

Below  500  microns  but  greater       33-33 
than  90  microns 

NOTE  —  The  sieves  shall   conform  to  IS  460  (  Part 

1  )  :  1985. 

5  CHEMICAL  REQUIREMENTS 

5.1  The  standard  sand  shall  be  free  from 
organic  impurities.  The  loss  of  mass  on  extrac- 
tion with  hot  hydrochloric  acid  of  rd  1T6  ( con- 
forming to  IS  265  :  1987  )  shall  not  be  more 
than  0-250  percent  when  tested  as  per  5.1.1. 

5.1.1  The  sand  shall  be  dried  at  lOO^'C  for  one 
hour.  Two  grams  of  the  sand  shall  be  trans- 
ferred to  porcelain  dish  and  20  ml  of  hydro- 
chloric acid  and  20  ml  of  distilled  water  added 
to  it.  This  shall  be  heated  on  a  water  bath 
for  one  hour.  It  shall  then  be  filtered,  washed 
well  with  hot  water,  dried  find  ignited  in  a 
covered  crucible.  The  mass  of  the  residue  shall 
be  determined  and  the  loss  in  mass  calculated. 

6  DELIVERY 

Each  size  fraction  {see  4*2)  of  the  standard 
sand  shall  be  packed  separately  in  50  kg  or 
'25  kg  jute  canvas  bags  [  jute  canvas  conforming 
to  IS  10036  (Part  2):  1982]  or  metal  con- 
tainers and  sealed  properly.  The  particle  size 
of  standard  sand  shall  be  clearly  and  indelibly 
marked  on  each  bag/ container.  Each  supply 
shall  contain  equal  quantities  of  each  of  the 
,  fractions. 

7  MARKING 

Standard  sand  may  also  be  marked  with  the 
Standard -Mark. 

NOTE  —  If  the  standard  sand  is  not  covered  by  the 
Standard  Mark,  a  Certificate  of  conformity  from  the 
Concrete  and  Soil  Research  Laboratory,  Govern- 
ment of  Tamil  Nadu,  Chepauk,  Madras  stating  that 
the  material  conforms  to  the  requirements  of  this 
specification  in  all  respects,  shall  be  kept  inside  each 
bag/container. 


Bureau  of  Indian  Standards 

BIS  is  a  statutory  institution  established  under  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  Act,  1986  to  promote 
harmonious  development  of  the  activities  of  standardization,  marking  and  quality  certification  of  goods 
and  attending  to  connected  matters  in  the  country. 

Copyright 

BIS  has  the  copyright  of  all  its  publications*  No  part  of  these  publications  may  be  reproduced  in  any  form 
without  the  prior  permission  in  writing  of  BIS.  This  does  not  preclude  the  free  use,  in  the  course  of 
implementing  the  standard,  of  necessary  details,  such  as  symbols  and  sizes,  type  or  grade  designations. 
Enquiries  relating  to  copyright  be  addressed  to  the  Director  (Publications),  BIS. 

Review  of  Indian  Standards 

Amendments  are  issued  to  standards  as  the  need  arises  on  the  basis  of  comments.  Standards  are  also  reviewed 
periodically;  a  standard  along  with  amendments  is  reafFumed  when  such  review  indicates  that  no  changes  are 
needed;  if  the  review  indicates  that  changes  are  needed,  it  is  taken  up  for  revision.  Users  of  Indian  Standards 
should  ascertain  that  they  are  in  possession  of  the  latest  amendments  or  edition  by  referring  to  the  latest  issue  of 
'BIS  Catalogue'  and  'Standards:  Monthly  Additions*. 

This  Indian  Standard  has  been  developed  from.  Doc  :  No.  GED  2 


Amendments  Issued  Since  Publication 


Amend  No. 


Date  of  Issue 


Text  Affected 


BUREAU  OF  INDIAN  STANDARDS 

Headquarters  : 

Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg,  New  Delhi  1 10  002 
Telephones  :  323  01  31,  323  33  75,  323  94  02 

Regional  Offices : 
Central 


Eastern 


Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg 
NEW  DELHI  110  002 

1/14  CI.T.  Scheme  VII M,  V.  I.  P.  Road,  Kankurgachi 
KOLKATA700  054 


Northern  ;    SCO  335-336,  Sector  34-A,  CHANDIGARH  160  022 

Southern  :    CI.T.  Campus,  IV  Cross  Road,  CHENNAI  600  1 13 

Western    :    Manakalaya,  E9  MIDC,  Marol,  Andheri  (East) 
MUMBAI 400  093 


Telegrams  :  Manaksanstha 
(Common  to  all  offices) 

Telephone 

f323  16  17 
^323  38  41 

r337  84  99,337  85  61 
1337  86  26,337  91  20 


{ 


60  38  43 

60  20  25 


r254  12  16,254  14  42 
\254  25  19,254  13  15 

r832  92?5,  832  78  58 

1.832  78  91,832  78  92 


Branches  :  AHMEDABAD.  BANGALORE.  BHOPAL.  BHUBANESHWAR.  COIMBATORE.  PARI  DA  BAD. 
GHAZIABAD.  GUWAHATL  HYDERABAD.  JAIPUR.  KANPUR.  LUCKNOW.  NAGPUR. 
NALAGARH.  PATNA.  PUNE.  RAJKOT.  THIRUVANANTHAPURAM!  VISAKHAPATNAM 


Reprography  Unit,  BIS,  New  Delhi,  India 


