**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 334 (2002) : Glossary of Terms Relating to Bitumen and 
Tar [PCD 6: Bitumen Tar and their Products] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 334 : 2002 

Indian Standard 

GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING 
TO BITUMEN AND TAR 

( Third Revision ) 

ICS 01 040.75; 75.140 



O BIS 2002 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

August 2002 n ■ ^ 

* Price Group 3 



Bitumen, Tar and Their Products Sectional Committee, PCD 6 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard (Third Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Bitumen, Tar and Their Products Sectional Committee had been approved by the Petroleum, Coal and 
Related Products Division Council. 

This standard was first published in 1953 and subsequently revised in 1965 and 1982. Due to considerable 
developments in the application of bitumen, tar and their products in the engineering and chemical fields 
resuhing in an increase in the number of terms used, it became necessary to revise the standard to standardize 
the terminology on a more exact basis so as to avoid ambiguity and confusion. It is hoped that the glossary of 
terms in this revision would help in fixing a more precise meaning of words which have acquired too general 
usage. To facilitate ease of reference, the terms have been arranged alphabetically. 

In the formulation of this standard, due weightage has been given to International co-ordination among the 
standards and practices prevailing in other countries and this has been met by drawing assistance from ASTM 
D 8-1997 * Standard Terminology Relating to Materials for Roads and Pavements' issued by the American 
Society for Testing and Materials, USA. 

The composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given in Annex A . 



18 334:2002 



Indian Standard 

GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING 
TO BITUMEN AND TAR 

( Third Revision ) 



1 SCOPE 



This standard defines the terms relating to the products 
commercially known as bitumen and tar. 

2 DEFINITIONS 



Adhesion — The property by means of which a 
material in a liquid or semi-solid form adheres or sticks 
to the surface of a solid body. It is achieved by 
molecular attraction of molecules of two different 
bodies. 

Adhesion Active — When bitumen in hot condition 
is able to coat wet aggregates, it is termed as active 
adhesion. 

Adhesion Agent — A substance used for the purpose 
of improving the adhesion or bond between the solid 
body and the binder used to coat it. 

Adhesion Passive — When aggregates coated with 
bitumen are immersed in water and bitumen film is 
retained, it is called passive adhesion. 

Anthracene Oil — The heavy fi-action of distillate 
oil obtained from coal tar (above 300°C) having a 
specific gravity between 1.05 and 1.1 at 38°C. 

Ash — Inorganic residue remaining after ignition of 
combustible substances. 

Asphalt — A natural or artificial mbcture in which 
bitumen is associated with inert mineral matter. The 
word 'asphalt' should always be qualified by indication 
of its origin or nature. 

Asphaltic Bitumen — A subdivision of the generic 
bitumen, which is manufactured by the oil industry 
from petroleum. 

Asphaltenes — The hydrocarbon fraction of bitumen 
which is soluble in carbon disulphide, but insoluble 
in n-heptane/n-pentane, etc. 

Asphalt, Lake — A solid or semi-solid naturally 
occurring asphalt existing in well defined surface 
deposits. 

Asphalt, Mastic — An intimate mbcture of mineral 
fillers, well graded sand and/or stone chippings with 
a hard grade of bitumen, cooked and laid hot manually 
or mechanically. The mixture settles to a coherent. 



voidless and impermeable solid or semi-solid mass 
under normal atmospheric temperature condition. 

Asphalt, Natural or Native — A mixture occurring 
m nature in which bitumen is associated with inert 
mineral matter. 

Asphalt, Rock — A naturally occurruig rock for- 
mation, usually calcareous, a sandstone in the pores 
and veins, of which is found impregnated. 

B 

Bitumen — A black or dark brown non-crystalline 
solid or viscous material havmg adhesive properties, 
derived from petroleum either by natural or refinery 
processes and substantially soluble in carbon 
disulphide. 

Bitumen, Blown — Bitumen, the properties of which 
are modified by blowing air through it at a 
comparatively high temperature and pressure. 

Bitumen, Concrete (Asphaltic Concrete) — A well 
graded mixture of high quality aggregates with 
designed proportion of bitumen, hot mixed, hot laid 
and rolled into a uniform dense mass wbh specified 

design criteria. 

Bitumen Cutback — Bitumen, the viscosity of which 
is reduced with a suitable volative diluent, usually a 
petroleum distillate. 

Bitumen Cutback, Rapid Curing — Bitumen, which 
is blended with a nq)htha type distillate. 

Bitumen Cutback, Medium Curing — Bitumen, 
which is blended with a kerosene type distillate. 

Bitumen Cutback, Slow Curing — Bitumen, which 
is blended with high boiling oils or containing a higher 
viscous oil than in mediiun or rapid curing cutback. 

Bitumen Cutback, Digboi Type — A cutback 
bitumen made out of bitumen from paraffinic crude 
of Assam. 

Bitumen, Digboi Type — Bitumen obtained from 
processmg of paraffinic crude of Assam. 

Bitumen Emulsion — A liquid product in which a 
substantial amount of bitumen is dispersed in a finely 
divided droplets in an aqueous medium containing 
an emulsifier and a stabilizer. 



IS 334 : 2002 



Bitumen Emulsion, Anionic — An emulsion in which 
the anion of the emulsifier is at the interface with the 
bitumen particles, which are hegatively charged and 
the aqueous phase is alkaline. 

Bitumen Emulsion, Cationic — An emulsion in 
which the cation of the emulsifier is at the interface 
with the bitumen particles, which are positively 
charged and the aqueous phase is acidic. 

Bitumen Emulsion, Rapid Setting — A quick setting 
emulsion used for surface treatment, penetration 
macadam and tack coat. 

Bitumen Emulsion, Medium Setting — A medium 
breaking emulsion used for plant or road mixes with 
fine aggregates between 5 percent and 20 percent 
retained on 2.36 mm sieve. Used for open graded 
premix work and bituminous macadam. 

Bitumen Emulsion, Slow Setting — A slow breaking 
emulsion used for plant or road mixes with graded 
fine aggregates greater than 20 percent, passes a 
2.36 mm sieve and a portion of which may pass a 
75 |im sieve. Used in slurry seal, seal coat, soil/sand 
stabilization, etc. 

Bitumen, Fluxed — Paving bitumen, viscosity of 
which is reduced by adding a substantially non-volatile 
diluent. 

Bitumen, Industrial — Also known as blown or 
oxidized bitumen used in a variety of industrial 
applications. 

Bitumen, Lake — see Asphalt, Lake. 

Bitumen, Liquid — Bitumen having a penetration of 
more than 350 at 25°C under a load of 50 g applied 
for one second. 

Bitumen, Mastic — see Asphalt, Mastic. 

Bitumen, Macadam — An open graded mixture of 
high quality aggregate with designed proportion of 
bitumen hot-mixed and hot-laid and rolled 
into 'c' most. 

Bitumen, Natural or Native — see Asphalt, Natural 
or Native. 

Bitumen, Paving — Solid or semi-solid bitumens of 
specified penetration used for paving roads, air fields, 

etc. 

Bitumen, Rock — see Asphalt, Rock. 

Bitumen Rubberized — A straight run bitumen 
whose characteristics have been modified by addition 
of crumb or natural rubber. 

Bitumen Polymer Modified — A straight run 
bitumen, the characteristics of which have been 



improved by addition of polymers, namely, 
styrene-butadiene-styrene (SBS), ethyl vinyl acetate 
(EVA) or polyethylene (PE). 

Bitumen, Semi-Solid — Bitumen having a 
penetration of more than 10 at 25°C under a load 
of 100 g applied for 5 s and a penetration of not more 
than 350 at 25°C under a load of 50 g applied for one 
second. 

Bitumen, Solid — Bitumen having a penetration 
of not more than 10 at 25°C, under a load of 100 g 
applied for 5 s. 

Bitumen, Steam Refined — Residue from distillation 
of crude petroleum processed further with the injection 
of steam to a specified viscosity or penetration. 

Bitumen, Straight Run — Bitumen obtained as the 
end product or residue from refining of crude 
petroleum under direct distillation. 

Bitumen Primer — A cut-back bitumen product of 
low viscosity that penetrates into a base/sub-base and 
stabilizes loose particles upon application. 

Bituminous — Containing or treated with, bitumen, 
tar or other similar materials. 



Carbenes — The organic components of bitumen 
which are soluble in carbon disulphide but insoluble 
in carbon tetrachloride. 

Carboids — The inorganic matter present in bitumen 
which are insoluble in carbon disulphide. 

Carbon, Fixed — The organic matter of residual coke 
obtained from heating hydrocarbon products in a 
covered vessel in the absence of oxygen. 

Cohesion — It is the molecular attraction of the 
molecules of the same product. In bitumen molecular 
attraction is revealed by ductility test. 

Creosote Oil — The oils or a blend of oil fractions 
obtained from coal tar, when distilled between 
200°C and 300°C. 

Curing — The process of evaporation of the volatile 
petroleum oils from bitumen in cut-back bitumen. 



Dielectric Strength (Electric Strength) — A measure 
of the electrical insulating properties of bitumen, as 
the breakdown occurs when a specified voltage is 
reached, when an increasing alternating voltage is 
applied to a sample under specified conditions. The 
dielectric strength is measured in kV/mm and depends 
upon the conditions of testing. 



IS 334 : 2002 



Ductility — The property by which a material can be 
drawn in fine thread without breaking. For bitumen, 
it is measured by the distance in centimetres to which 
it will elongate before breaking, when two ends of a 
briquette specimen of the material of the specified form 
and cross-section are pulled apart under a specified 
speed and temperature. 

Dyoamic Shear Rheometer — An equipment used 
to measure the dynamic properties of bitumen under 
cyclic loading. 



Emulsifier/Emulsifying Agent — An additive of the 
anionic or cationic type to facilitate dispersion of two 
immiscible phases in fme droplets of 5 jim to 20 jim 
diameter. 

Emulsion Breaking — The coagulation of the 
dispersed material in an emulsion whereby it separates 
from the aqueous part of the emulsion. 

Emulsion, Stability — The property of an emulsion 
whereby it resist coagulation to caus^ breaking. 

Equiviscous Temperature (EVT) — The temperature 
in degrees centigrade at which time for outflow 
of 50 ml material is 50 s as measured by the standard 
tar viscometer (STV) using 10 mm cup. 



Fire Point — The lowest temperature at which the 
material gets ignited and bums continuously under 
specified conditions of test. 

Flash Point — The lowest temperature at which the 
vapour of the material can be ignited momentarily by 
a flame under specified conditions of test. 

Float Value — A measure of the consistency of 
cut-back bitumens and is the time in s elapsed between 
placing a briquette bitumen in water and the water 
breaking through it under specified conditions of test 
and temperature. The normal testing temperature is 
50°C. 

Flux Oil — A substantially volatile/non-volatile 
diluent used for reducing the viscosity of bituminous 
materials. 

FRASS Breaking Point — The temperature at which 
bitumen first becomes brittle as indicated by the 
appearance of cracks, when a thin film of bitumen on 
a metal plate is cooled and flexed in accordance with 
specified conditions of the test. 



N 

Newtonian Liquid — It is a liquid in which the rate 
of shear is proportional to the shearing stress. The 
ratio of the shearing stress to the rate of shear is termed 
as the viscosity of the licuid. If this ratio is not 
constant, the liquid is termed as non-Newtonian. 

O 

Oils — The constituent of bitumen obtained after 
separation of resins from maltenes. 

P 

Penetration — A measure of hardness or consistency 
of the bitumen. It is the vertical distance traversed by 
a standard needle entering the material under specified 
conditions of load, time and temperature; and is 
expressed in one-tenths of millimetre. 

Penetration Ratio — It is the ratio of penetration 
at 4°C, 200 g, 60 s to penetration at 25°C, 100 g, 5 s. 
It is a measure of temperature susceptibility of the 
material. 

Phenols — An oily constituent of coal tar, coal tar 
fractions or hydrogenated coal products, soluble in 
aqueous caustic soda solution. 

Pitch, Coal Tar — The black or dark brown, solid or 
semi-solid, fusible and agglomerative residue 
remaining after partial evaporation or fractional 
distillation of coal tar. 

Pitch, Mastic — A well graded mixture of mineral 
matter and coal tar pitch suitably blended, cooked and 
laid hot manually or mechanically by suitable float. 

R 

Resins — The dark brown sticky constituent of 
bitunien separated by absorption on Fuller's earth, 
silica gel, etc, from the maltenes. 

Residue of Specified Penetration — It is the 
percentage by mass of a residue obtained by heating a 
bituminous material to the required temperature and 
having a specified penetration value. 

Road Oil — A heavy petroleum distillate usually 
employed for preparation of slow curing cutbacks. 

Road Tar — A product obtained by blending pitch, 
anthracene oil and creosote oil in such a manner that 
it conforms to a specification which defines its 
suitability for road use. 



Loss on Heating — The loss in mass of water, oil 
and other constituents of bitumen when heated at a 
standard temperature of 163°C for 5 h under specified 
conditions of test. 



Setting — A process by which a bitumen emulsion 
breaks by neutralization of charge or evaporation of 
water and thereby reverting to original bitumen. 



IS 334 : 2002 



Softening Point — The temperature (in °C) at which 
a standard ball passes through a sample of bitumen in 
a mould and falls through a distance of 2.5 Cm, when 
heated under water or glycerin at specified conditions 

of test. 

Specific Gravity — The ratio of the mass of a given 
volume of a material to the mass of an equal volume 
of water, the temperature of both bemg specified. 

Stripping — The displacement of coated bituminous 
film from the surface of a road stone in presence of 

water. 



Tack Coat — Bitumen, road tar or an emulsion 
sprayed as a thin film on a surface to achieve the 
adhesion with superimposed course. 

Tar — A viscous material heaving adhesive properties, 
obtained from the destructive distillation of certain 
types of organic materials. The word 'tar' shall be 
preceded by the name of the material from which it is 
obtained, that is, coal, shale, peat, etc. Its mode of 
production shall also be indicated. 

Tar, Coal (Crude Coal Tar) — Tar produced by the 
destructive distillation of bituminous coal. 

Tar, Coke Oven — Tar produced as a bye-product in 
a coke oven plant where coal is heated in a coke oven 
above 1 000°C. 

Tar, Emulsion — An emulsion in which fine droplets 
of tar are suspended in water with a suitable emulsifi^r. 

Tar, Gas House — Tar produced in retorts during 
production of illuminating gas from coal. 

Tar, High Temperature — The tar obtained as a bye- 
product in high temperature carbonization of coal. In 
high temperature carbonization, coal is heated 
above 1 000°C, 



Tar, Horizontal Retort — Tar obtained as a bye- 
product in the carbonization of coal in a horizontal 
retort. 

Tar, Low Temperature — It is obtained by low 
temperature carbonization of inferior quality coal. 
Such tars are generally rich in phenolic components. 
In low temperature, inferior quality coal is heated 
to 750°C to 1 000°C. 

Tar, Refined — Tar obtained by direct distillation of 
coal tar or by fluxing tar pitch with anthracene oil 
and creosote oil to the required consistency. 

Tar, Vertical Retort — Tar obtained as a bye-product 
in carbonization of coal in vertical retorts. 

Tar, Wood — Tar obtained from the destructive 
distillation of wood. 



Viscosity — The property of a liquid by which it resists 
flow due to internal friction and is measured by the 
ratio of the shearing stress to the rate of shear and is 
called the co-efficient of viscosity. 

Viscosity, Absolute or Dynamic of a Newtonian 
Liquid — It is the tangential force required to 
maintain a velocity between the two layers unit 
distance apart. The COS unit for viscosity is poise. 

Viscosity, Kinematic — The ratio of the absolute 
viscosity to the density of the liquid. It is a measure of 
the resistance to flow of a liquid under gravity. The 
SI unit of kinematic viscosity is mVs for practical use 
a submultiple of (mmVs) is more convenient. The unit 
centistroke is 1 mmVs and is used customary. 

W 

Water Content — The quantity of water present in a 
material and expressed as a percent by weight of the 
material. 



IS 334: 2002 



ANNEX A 

(Foreword) 

COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 

Bitumen, Tar and Their Products Sectional Committee, PCD 6 



Organization 
Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 



Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 

BuiJding Materials and Technology Promotion Council, New Delhi 

Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 

Central Fuel Research Institute, Dhanbad 

Cochin Refineries Limited, Cochin 

Dr UppaPs Testing and Analytical Laboratory, Ghaziabad 
Durgapur Projects Limited, Durgapur 
Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, New Delhi 
Directorate General of Border Roads, New Delhi 

Engineer-in-Chief s Branch, Army Head Quarters, New Delhi 

Highway Research Station, Chennai 

Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 

Hindustan Colas Limited, Mumbai 

Indian Institute of Petroleum, Dehradun 

Indian Oil Corporation Limited (Marketing Division), Mumbai 

Indian Oil Corporation Limited [(R&D) Centre], Faridabad 

Indian Oil Corporation (R&P), New Delhi 

Indian Roads Congress, New Delhi 

Lloyd Insulations (India) Limited, New Delhi 

Ministry of Surface Transport (Department of Surface Transport), New Etelhi 

Ministry of Defence (DGQA), New Delhi 

Madras Refinery Limited, Chennai 

National Test House, Kolkata 

National Building Organization, New Delhi 

Public Works Department, Government of West Bengal, Kolkata 

Public Works Department, Mumbai 
Public Works Department, Uttar Pradesh 



Repres€ntative(s) 
Prof P. K. Sikdar (Chairman) 

Shri Sunil Bose {Alternate I) 

Dr p. K. Jain {Alternate II) 
Shri J. A. Janaj 

Dr Noble Georck {Alternate) 
ShriR.K.Celly 

Shri B. Anil Kumar {Alternate) 
Superintending Engineer 

The ExEomvE Engweer {Alternate) 
Dr Shrimatt A. Bhattacharya 

Shri U. Bhattacharya {Alternate) 
ShriV.Paily 

Shri R. Venugopal (Alternate) 
Shri R. S. Shukla 
DrRS.Sarkar 
Dkectqr 
ShriS.S.Porwal 

Shri A. K. Gupta (Alternate) 
Col V.K. P. Singh 

Lt-Col R. S. Bhanwala (Alternate) 
Director 

Deputy EteEcroR (Alternate) 
Shri S. K. Bhainagar 

Shri A. S. Prabhakar (Alternate) 
ShriRRajendran 

Shri H. Padmanabhan (Alternate) 
Shri U. C. Gupta 

Shri Mohd Anwar (Alternate) 

ShRIR. S.SlSODIA 

Shri Prem Kumar (Alternate) 
SHRiB.R.TYAa 

Shri M. P. Kala (Alternate) 
ShriU.K.Basu 

Shri S. K. Prasad (Alternate) 
ShriK.B.Rajoria 

Shri A. V. Sinha (Alternate) 
Shri Mohft Khanna 

Shri K. K. Mttra (Alternate) 
Shri C.C. Bhattach/wya 

Shri S. P. Singh (Alternate) 
Shri K. H. Gandhi 

Shri A. K. Sinha (Alternate) 
Shri M. S. Shayam Sunder 

Shri B. Sairam (Alternate) 
Shri A. K. Chakraborty 

Shri S. K. Agarwal (Alternate) 
ShriA.K.Lal 

Shri A. G. Dhongade (Alternate) 
Shri Amttav A Chatierjee 

Shri RABiNDRANATHBASu(i4/temaiSe) 
ShriBorczV.B. 
ShriV.P.Bansal 

Dr G. p. S. Chauhan (Alternate) 



(Continued on page 6) 



IS 334 : 2002 

{Continued from page 5) 



Organization 
Public Works Department, Tamil Nadu 

Regional Research Laboratory, Jorhat 
STP Limited, Kolkata 

University of Roorkee, Roorkee 
BIS Directorate General 



Representative (s) 

Shri N. Dayanandan 

Shm p. Jayaraman {Alternate) 
Dr R. C, Baruah 
Shri T.K.Roy 

Shri S. Bhanusekhar {Alternate) 
Prof H. C. MEHhfoiRATTA 
Shri Anjan Kar, Director & Head (PCD) 
[Representing Director General {Ex-qfficio)\ 



Membe r-^ecre tary 

Shri T. Kalaivanan 

Joint Director (PCD), BIS 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This docs not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, t>i>e or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to Ac Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as die need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along widi amendments is reaffbmed when such review indicates that no diaages are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken v^ fen* revisi<Hi. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of die latest amendments or editiim by referring to die latest issue of 
'BIS Catalogue' and 'Standards: Montiily Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. PCD 6 (1340). 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters : 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bs^a(kir Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10 002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

Telephones : 323 01 3 1, 323 33 75, 323 94 02 (Common to all offices) 

Regional Offices : Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg r323 76 17 

NEW DELHI 1 10 002 ^323 38 4 1 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi r337 84 99, 337 85 61 

KOLKATA 700 054 \337 86 26, 337 91 20 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160 022 f 60 38 43 

60 20 25 



{: 



Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600 1 13 J254 12 16, 254 14 42 

\254 25 19,254 13 15 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) r832 92 95, 832 78 58 

MUMB AI 400 093 \ 832 78 9 1 , 832 78 92 

Branches /. AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. 
GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



