•••••••••••••••• 



ic i3^ 




^ 



ic 



Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 



Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
"Step Out From the Old to the New" 



IS 4015 (1998) : Guide for Handling Cases of Pesticide 
Poisoning [FAD 1: Pesticides and Pesticides Residue 
Analysis] 



^nz^^^aznz^^ 



SSa£\ * H>ftPii5c%^Na*^ 




Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 




-iSiS 




5>- 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 4015 : 1998 

( Reaffirmed 2003 ) 



Indian Standard 

GUIDE FOR HANDLING CASES OF 
PESTICIDE POISONING 

( First Revision ) 



ICS 65.100 



©BIS 1998 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

February 1998 i Price Group 8 



Pesticides Sectional Committee, FAD I 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Pesticides Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture Division Council. 

The use of various chemical pesticides for the control of pests of agricultural and public health importance is 
on the increase in the country. Large-scale and long-term use of some of these chemicals has often been found 
to result in toxic manifestations both in man and livestock. As some of these compounds are highly toxic, it is 
extremely essential to exercise great care in their use. Pesticide poisoning may result from careless handling by 
the people engaged in its application. Such poisoning may result even from continuous contact, by absorption, 
through skin or by inhalation of toxic vapour by the workers in the course of normal handling of the material, 
or by swallowing it accidentiy or intentionally. In all such cases of poisoning, immediate medical attention is 
essential, but even before this becomes available, application of certain well accepted first-aid measures is 
necessary. It was, therefore, suggested that an Indian Standard guide should be published covering both the 
first-aid measures and necessary information for the physician who has to attend cases of pesticide poisoning. 

It is very essential that all the necessary precautions, such as wearing protective gloves, overall and masks should 
be taken before commencing the application of pesticides in the field. The use of gas-masks, respirators and 
safety goggles is imperative before commencing any fumigating operation indoors. During the application of 
pesticides strict care should be taken not to come into contact with pesticides in any manner. Washing of hands 
and the exposed parts of the body with soap and plenty of water is very important after completing any kind of 
pesticides operation. The containers of pesticides should be tightiy closed and stored in a safe place beyond the 
reach of children, pets and livestock after using the same. 

Keeping the above in view, this standard was published in 1967 in two parts. The standard has been revised to 
incorporate the following changes in addition merging both parts in one document: 

a) Routes of entry of the pesticides; 

b) Inclusion of World Health Organisation (WHO) classification by hazard; and 

c) Preventive measures of pesticides poisoning. 

These are the general guidelines for treatment of pesticide poisoning cases. However, the treatment of individual 
patient should be undertaken considering the physical and medical status of the patient. Symptomatic and 
supportive therapy should be given to every patient depending on the condition. In case any further details are 
required any standard text books of medical toxicology may be consulted. 



IS 4015 : 1998 



Indian Standard 



GUIDE FOR HANDLING CASES OF 
PESTICIDE POISONING 

( First Revision ) 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This guide outlines the basic informations intended 
for the use of a physician with regard to the 
definition/classification of pesticides, routes of entry 
in the body, first-aid measures, supportive therapy, 
specific chemical antidotes, signs and symptoms of 
poisoning, diagnosis and treatment of different groups 
of pesticides, preventive measures in relation to 
poisoning due to different types of pesticides and their 
formulations during their manufacture, testing or in the 
field applications. 

2 ABBREVIATIONS 

Z 1 The abbreviations used in this standard to indicate 
each class of pesticides and their formulations are 
given below: 

Abbreviations Class of Pesticide or 
Formulation 

Ac Acaricide 

Be Bactericide 

CB Bait Concentrate 

DP Dustable Powder 

DS Powder for Dry Seed Treatment 

EC Emulsifiable Concentrate 

FC Flowable Concentrate 

Fg Fungicide 

Fu Fumigant 

Gr Granule 

Hr Herbicide 

In Insecticide 

L Liquid 

LV Low Volume 

Mo Molluscide 

OC Organo-Chlorine 

OP Organo Phosphorus 

PGR Plant Growth Regulator 

RB Bait (Ready for use) 

Ro Rodenticide 

SL Soluble Concentrate 

SP Soluble Powder 

Sol Solution 

Tc Technical 

ULC Ultra low Volume Liquid 

WP Wettable Powder 

WS Water Dispersible Powder for 
Slurry Treatment 



3 DEFINITION 

Pesticide means any substance or mixture of 
substances intended for preventing, destroying, 
controlling or mitigating any pest including vectors of 
human or animal diseases, unwanted species of plants 
or animals causing harm during or otherwise 
interfering with the production, processing, storage; 
transport or marketing of food, agricultural 
commodities, wood and wood products or animal 
foodstuffs or which may be administered to animals 
for the control of insects, arachnids or other pests in or 
on their bodies. The term includes substances 
intended for use as a plant growth regulator, defoliant, 
desiccant, or agent for thinning fruit or preventing the 
premature fall of fruit, and substances applied to crops 
either before or after harvest to protect the commodity 
from deterioration during storage and transport. 

4 CLASSIFICATION OF PESTICIDES 

4.1 Pesticides are generally classified according to the 
type of pests against which they are used. These are 
given under 4.1.1 to 4.1.9. 

4.1.1 Insecticides 

These are substances or mixture of substances used for 
the control of insects. Common examples are BHC, 
DDT, Malathion. 

4.1.2 Fungicides 

These are substances or mixture of substances used for 
the control of fungi. Common examples are 
Carbendazim, Copper oxychloride, Mancozeb. 

4.1.3 Acaricides 

These are substances or mixture of substances used for 
the control of mites. Common examples are Dicofol 
and Chlorobenzilate. 

4.1.4 Rodenticides 

These are substances or mixture of substances used for 
the control of rats, mice and other rodents. Common 
examples are Zinc phosphide. Warfarin and 
Bromadialone. 



1 



IS 4015 : 1998 



4.1.5 Fumigants 

These are substances or mixture of substances which 
are used in the control of insects or other pests by 
fumigation. Common examples are Methyl bromide, 
Ethylene dibromide. 

4.1.6 Molluscicides 

These are substances or mixture of substances which 
are used in the control of slugs and snails. Common 
examples are Metaldehyde, Fentin acetate. 

4.1.7 Nematicides 

These are substances for mixture of substances which 
are used in the control of nematodes. Common 
examples are Aldicarb. 

4.1.8 Plant Growth Regulators 

These are substances or mixture of substances applied 
with the objective of regulating or enhancing the 
growth and development of plants. Common 
examples are Alpha naphthyl acetic acid, Ethepon, 
Gibberellic acid. 

4.1.9 Herbicides 

These are substances or mixture of substances used for 
the control of weeds. Common examples are 2, 4-D, 
isoproturon. Paraquat. 

4.2 Classification According to Chemical 
Structure 

On the basis of their chemical structure, the pesticides 
may be classified as given in 4.2.1 to 4.2.13. 

4.2.1 Organochlorine 

BHC, DDT, Lindane, Endosulfan, etc. 

4.2.2 Organophosphorus 

Chlorpyriphos, Diazinon, Dichlorvos, Phorate, etc. 

4.2.3 Carbamate 

Aldicarb, Benthiocarb, Carbofuran. 

4.2.4 Pyrethroids 

Allethrin, Alphamethrin, Cypermethrin. 

4.2.5 Coumarins/Indandiones (Anticoagulants) 
Bromadialone, Coumachlor, Warfarin. 

4.2.6 Halogen Fumigants 

Methyl bromide, Ethylene dibromide and Carbon 
tetrachloride mixture. 

4.2.7 Cyanide Fumigants 
Sodium cyanide. Calcium cyanide. 

4.2.8 Phosphine Fumigants 
Aluminium phosphide, Zinc phosphide. 



4.2.9 Organic Acids Including Chhrophenoxy Group 
and Phenolic Compounds 

2, 4-D, Dinocap. 

4.2.10 Inorganic and Organometallic (Arsenicals, 
Mercurials, Copper Compounds) 

Ethyl mercury chloride, Phenyl mercury acetate, 
Copper oxychloride, etc. 

4.2.11 Pthalamide Fungicides 
Captafol.Captan. 

4.2.12 Thiocarbamates 

Cartap Hydrochloride, Chlorothalonil, Thiram, Zineb. 

4.2.13 Miscellaneous 
Nicotin Sulphate, Sulphur. 

4.3 Classificatioii of Pesticides Based on Acute 
Toxicity Under the Insecticides Rules, 1971 — {See 
Table 1) 

4.4 Classification of Pesticides by Hazard as per 
WHO Recommendation 

4.4.1 Basis of Classification 

The classification distinguishes between the more and 
the less hazardous forms of each pesticide in that it is 
based on the toxicity of the technical compound and 
on its formulations. In particular, allowance is made 
for the lesser hazards from soilds as compared with 
liquids. 

The classification is based primarily on the acute oral 
and dermal toxicity to the rat since these 
determinations are standard procedures in toxicology. 
Where the dermal LD 50 value of a compound is such 
that it would place it in a more restrictive class than the 
oral LD 50 value would indicate, the compound, will 
always be classified in the more restrictive class. 
Provision is made for the classification of a particular 
compound to be adjusted if, for any reason, the acute 
hazard to man differs from that indicated by LD 50 
assessments alone. 

4.4.2 Guidelines to WHO classification of pesticide 
by hazard. 

Table 1 : Class la "EXTREMELY 

HAZARDOUS" 
Table 2 : Class lb '^HIGHLY HAZARDOUS" 
Tables : Class H "MODERATELY 

HAZARDOUS" 
Table 4 : Class HI "SLIGHTLY 

HAZARDOUS" 
Table 5 : Technical products unlikely to present 

acute hazard in normal use. 
Table 6 : Technical products not included in the 

classification and believed to be 

obsolete or discontinued for use as 

pesticides. 



Table 1 Classificatioii of Pesticides Based on Accute Toxicity under the Insecticides Rules^ 1971 

(Clause 4.3) 



SI 
No. 

(1) 



Categorical 
Classification 

(2) 



Symbol 



(3) 



Oral LD 50 Dermal LD 50 
in Rats In Rats 

(mg/kg) (mg/kg) 

(4) (5) 



Statement Specified 

on Label of the 

Container 

(6) 



Calculated Probable 

Lethal Dose for 

70 kg. Person 

(7) 



i) Extremely 
toxic 
pesticides 




1-50 1-200 a) Keep out of the 

reach of children 

b) If swallowed or if 
symptoms of poison- 
ing occur, cali 
physician immediately 



A taste (less than 
7 drops) to one 
teaspoonf(t.s.f) 



ii) 


Highly 

toxic 

pesticides 




iii) 


Moderately 
toxic 


^^^NGER 




pesticides 


^p^ 


iv) 


Slightly 

toxic 

pesticides 


/caution 



51 - 500 



201 - 2 000 



IGREEN 



501-5 000 2 001-20000 



More than 
5000 



More than 
20 000 



Keep out of the 
reach of children 



Keep out of the 
reach of chidren 



Between 5 to 30 ml 



Between (lib) 
30 ml to 475 ml 



More than 475 ml 






IS 4015 : 1998 



Table? : Gaseous or volatile fumigants not 
classified under the WHO 
Recommended classification of 
pesticides by hazard. 

5 ENTRY OF PESTICIDES BODY 

5.1 Pesticide exposure to human beings can be acute 
or chronic. It may be occupational or non-ocupational, 
intentional or unintentional, accidental or incidental. 
On exposure the entry of pesticides in the human 
body may be by either of the following routes (see 
Fig.l): 

i) Oral (by mouth), 

ii) Respiratory (by inhalation), 

iii) Dermal (through skin), and 

iv) Ocular (through eye). 

5.2 Since individuals are often exposed in more than 
one way, the total exposure from all sources needs to 
be considered while assessing the health risks. The 
other factors at the time of exposure like duration of 
exposure, formulation (its acidity or pH, vehicle, 
physical state that is solid, liquid, gas and 
concentration of active ingredients) task performed, 
weather conditions (temperature, humidity, wind 
direction) and the conditions of skin (soreness or 
abrasions, wetness, location or part exposed) all 



influence the absorption of toxic ingredients and the 
actions of these materials on vital tissues. Well 
nourished, comfortably housed workers, enjoying 
adequate rest and hygiene, are less vulnerable to toxic 
chemicals than persons who are burdened with 
malnutrition, disease and fatigue. 

5.3 Absorption by way of lungs is very rapid (a few 
seconds); by the gut intermediate in rate (minutes to 
hours); and across the skin usually slower still (hours 
to days). Chemicals absorbed by the lungs and skin 
enter the systemic circulation directly; those absorbed 
from the gut are carried mainly by the portal 
circulation to the liver, where biotransformations may 
occur before they enter the systemic circulation. 

5.4 Ingestion of pesticide may occur as a result of 
contamination of food, drink and smoking material. 
Dermal exposure is of particular importance in 
workers who have extensive body surface exposure to 
foliage residues. This commonly occurs during the 
harvesting of fruit crops previously treated with 
pesticides. 

6 PREVENTION OF POISONING 

6.1 Pesticide poisoning or adverse effects due to 
pesticides can be prevented by using these pesticides 



OCULAR 
(THROUGH EYE ) 



MHALATION 
(THROUGH BREATHING 



ORAL 



(THROUGH MOUTH) 



OERMAL -^ 
(THROUGH SKIN) 




Fig. 1 Way of Entry of Pesticides in Human Body 



IS 4015 : 1998 



safely and judiciously. The following precautions are 
required to be taken during use of pesticides: 

i) Always use registered and approved pesticide 
in appropriate doses and by correct technology 
with all the precautions as indicated on the 
labels and leaflets. 

ii) Pesticides should not be stored in insecure 
places or along with food, feed or fodder. 
These should be stored in lock, away from the 
reach of children, incompetent persons and 
animals. 

iii) To avoid the skin contamination and inhalation 
during tiie use of pesticide, protective garments 
and equipments like apron, goggles, face mask, 
gum boots and respirator (in case of highly 
toxic pesticides) should be worn. 

iv) In case of any spillage or splash over the skin, 
it should be washed first with cold water then 
with water having normal temperature and 
then with lukewarm water, 
v) Adequate ventilation is essential at places 
where pesticides are measured, mixed, bagged 
or otherwise transferred from one container to 
another. 

vi) Eating, drinking or smoking should be avoided 
while working with pesticides. 

vii) Pesticide containers should not be used for 
storing any other things like grains, fodder, 
water, etc. Empty pesticide containers should 
be disposed off safely, 
viii) Water sources/lines and grounds should not be 
contaminated by left over pesticides. 

ix) Clogged nozzles of sprayers should not be 
opened by blowing. These may be opened by 
pin or stick or by washing with soap and water. 

x) Pesticides should not be sprayed in excessive 
heat or strong wind conditions or before or 
during the rainfall. Care should be taken of the 
wind direction and the spray should be done in 
the direction of wind not against it. 

xi) Re-entry (entry in field after last spray) into the 
pesticide sprayed field should be made 
after a minimum period of 24 h or prescribed 
period which is indicated on the label of the 
containers 

7 MANAGEMENT OF PESTICroE 
POISONING 

7.1 First-Aid Measures (Pre-hospital Care) 

In order to prevent further deterioration in the 
condition of the affected person certain tirst-aid 
measures can be undertaken before doctor reaches the 
site or the patient is sent to hospital. 



7.1.1 Termination of Exposure 

Shift the affected person from the contaminated 
environment. 

7.1.2 Decoruamirtaiion 

7.1.2.1 Skin contact 

Remove all contaminated clothings and the 
contaminated part should be washed with lot of water 
and soap. First wash should be done with cold water, 
if available, then with water having envirormiental 
temperature and subscquentiy with lukewarm water. 

7.1.2.2 Eye contamination 

Wash the eyes with plenty of clean cold water or tap 
water. 

7.1.2.3 Inhalation 

Carry the person to the open to fresh air. Clothings 
around the neck and chest must be loosened. 

7.1.2.4 Ingestion 

If victim is fully conscious and vomiting is to be 
induced then induce it by making the patient drink one 
or two glasses of water rapidly. Induce vomiting by 
tickling the back of the throat with fingers. Milk, 
alcohol and fatty substances should not be 
administered to such victims because it may enhance 
the absorption of fat soluble pesticides. 

NOTE — The common practice of inducing emesis by hyper- 
tonic saline or common salt solution is neither safe nor vei / 
effective and therefore should be avoided. Do not induce vomit- 
ing or give anything by mouth to unconscious patient. 

7.1.3 Position/Posture of Unconscious Patient 

If the person is unconscious lay him in semi-prone 
position, head down and turned to one side. 

7.1.4 Body Temperature Control 

If the patient is feeling extremely hot or excessive 
sweating is there then water sponging may be done. If 
the person is feeling cold then body temperature may 
be maintained by covering him with sheets or blankets. 

7.1.5 Difficulty in Breathing 

Observe the respiratory passage for any obstruction 
with foreign bodies such as artificial dentures, viscid 
secretions, dropping back of tongue etc, and 
remove/correct the cause. If the condition persists and 
person is unable to breath on his own then give 
aitificial respiration. The patient is laid on his back, 
airway cleared by pulling chin up and head tilted back 
and m-outh cleaned with a soft, clean cloth. Then 



IS 4015 : 1998 



mouth to mouth or mouth to nose respiration may be 
given by filling the chest of the person with air 10 times 
per minute and ensuring the chest movement with such 
blow. In case of poisoning by fumigants like 
Aluminium phosphide. Ethylene dibromide, Methyl 
bromide continuous mouth to mouth breathing should 
not be given by one person for more than 1 min. 

7.1.6 External cardiac massage may be done in case 
the heart beat ceases. 

7.1.7 Other Measures 

7.1.7.1 If the person suffers from convulsions then a 
spoon or wooden block may be placed in the mouth 
between the jaws. Minimize noise and any 
manipulation of the patient that may trigger seizure 
activity. 

7.1.7.2 Patient should be placed in a peaceful 
environment and should not be disturbed. Very fast 
driving over the bumpy roads may be avoided. 

7.1.7.3 Person attending the victim should avoid 
direct contact with heavily contaminated clothings and 
vomitus. Wear gloves and apron while washing 
pesticide from skin and hair. 

7.2 Supportive Threapy (Hospital Care) 

7.2.1 Stabilization 

7.2.1.1 Evaluation of airway 

See for any dyspnoea, air-hunger, hoarseness stridor, 
substernal or intercostal retractions and cyanosis. In 
case of respiratory insufficiency, following mesures 
should be taken: 

i) Lift the chin and tilt the head back, 
ii) Clear secretions, 
iii) Use nasopharyngeal or oropharyngeal airways 

if needed, 
iv) Tracheal intubation in comatose patients, and 
v) If above mesures fail, cricothyroidectomy or 
tracheostomy may be attempted as a last resort. 

7.2. 1.2 Assessment of ventilation and oxygenation 

Signs of inadequate ventilation or oxygenation are 
cyanosis, tachypnoea hypoventilation, suprasternal 
and/cr intercostal retraction and altered mental stauts. 
In case of inadequate ventilation or oxygenation, 
oxygen supplementation and if required, intubation 
may be done. 

7.2.1.3 Maintenance of circulation 

Look for signs and symptoms of shock or cardiac 
dysfunction and treat accordingly by infusing intra 
veinal (i.v.) fluids normal saline or ringer lactate 
vasopressors, like dopanrtine or antiarrhythmic drugs 



depending on type of arrhythmia. If facilities are 
available then Central Venous Pressure may be 
monitored. 

7.2.1.4 Management of CNS Junctions 

Look for state of consciousness and condition of pupil. 
If convulsions occur, treat as follows: 

Diazepam - S - 15 mg i.v. at the rate of not more than 
2 mg/min. If necessary repeat for every 10-15 min to 
a maximum of 30 mg. In children - the dose is 0.25 - 
0.40 mg/kg body weight, which may, be repeated 
every 10-15 min if necessary to a maximum of 10 mg. 
However, while administering diazepam, precaution is 
to be taken to administer it slowly to avoid hypotension 
and respiratory depression. Facilities should be 
available for intubating the patient in case of diazepam 
related respiratory depression. If seizure recurr 
following diazepam then either of the following drugs 
may be used: 



i) Phenytoin Sodium 
(Dilantin, Epileptin) 



ii) Phenobarbitone 
Sodium (Luminal, 
Gerdinal) 



The dose is 15-18 
mg/kg at a rate not 
more than 15 mg/ 
min. 

5 mg/kg i.v., at a rate 
not more than 50 
mg/min repeated 
every 20 min upto a 
maximum of 3 doses. 



NOTE — Phenobarbitone may produce nespiratoiy depres- 
sion, 

7.2.1.5 Fluid, electrolyte and acid base balance should 
be maintained. 

7.2.1.6 Measures to reduce absorption 

The following measures may be taken to reduce 
absorption: 
i) Eye 

Irrigate with neutral solution (Normal saline) 
for 1 5-20 min. 
ii) Skirt 

Remove contaminated clothes. Irrigate with 
copious amount of water or saline. Do not use 
neutralizing substances, 
iii) Gut 

a) Gastric lavage, 

b) Absorption by activated charcoal, and 

c) Cathartics. 

a) Gastric Lavage 

Contraindications 

— Ingestion of strong corrosives. 

— Coingestion of sharp objects. 



IS 4015 : 1998 



— Unconscious patients with seizures. 

— Unconscious patients should be intubated before 
lavage. 

— Kerosene oil (if kerosene oil is used as 
vehicle/solvent in pesticide formulation then 
gastric lavage should be done). 

Method 

— Patient should be in left lateral position. 

— Gastric intubation may be done with an 
orogastric tube 32-40 F in adults and 16-26 F in 
children. 

— First sample of lavage fluid should be saved for 
analysis. In children (upto 6 years age) 25-50 ml 
of warm isotonic saline should be used for 
lavage every time. In children between 7-12 
years 50-100 ml and in adults 200-250 ml tap 
water should be used. The lavage fluid be left 
inplace for about 1 min and then allowed to drain 
by gravity for several minutes and the lavage 
should be continued until clear fluid is recovered 
or until a minimum of 2 L has been used. 

Complications 

— Pulmonary aspiration 

— Oesophageal perforation, tension 
pneumothorax and empyema. 

— Epistaxis if large tubes are inserted nasally. 

— Electrolyte imbalance if lavage solutions other 
than saline are used in children (upto 6 years of 
age). 

b) Absorption by Activated Charcoal 

Activated charcoal is very effective in preventing the 
absorption of ingested substances when given within 
first few hours of exposure. 

Indications — Since neither emesis nor lavage 
completely removes ingested substances, 
administration of activated charcoal after initial 
decontamination procedures is recommended in most 
cases of overdose. 

Contraindications — Ingestion of strong acids, alkalis. 

Dosage — A minimum of 0,5 - 1.0 g/kg body weight 
of activated charcoal or 10 times the estimated amount 
of ingested chemical should be given in form of slurry 
(diluted at least 1 : 4 with water) orally or via orogastric 
tube. 

Precautions — The charcoal slurry must be mixed 
thoroughly to prevent the formation of charcoal plugs. 
A minimum of 250 ml of fluid is recommended if the 
powder form is used. Once the poison in the stomach 
or upper bowel is fully adsorbed on the charcoal 
particles, it is innocuous unless desorption occurs 



during its transit down the alimentary canal. Though 
the therapist who administers charcoal to a poison 
victim is not obliged to remove it by inducing emesis 
or by aspirating the stomach contents, but it may be 
safe? to do so if the poison is known to be highly toxic. 
To minimize the time available for desorption, it is 
probably useful to speed transit of charcoal poison 
complex through the bowel. 

c) Cathartics 

The usefulness of cathartics in the treatment of 
poisoning has not been proved unequivocally. The 
commonly used cathartics are saline cathartics (for 
example Magnesium citrate, Magnesium sulphate. 
Sodium sulphate, Disodium phosphate) and 
Saccharide (Sorbitol). Dosage of each of cathartics are 
given below. 

Magnesium sulphate — 150-250 ml of 10 percent 
solution in adults and 1-2 ml/kg in children. It contains 
8.3 milliequivalent of magnesium per gram of salt. 

Magnesium citrate — 250 ml of 1 percent solution in 
adults and 4 ml/kg in children. It contains 16 
milliequivalent of magnesium per gram of salt. 

Sodium sulphate — 150-250 ml of 10 percent solution 
in adults and 1-2 ml/kg in children. It contains 14 
milliequivalent of sodium per gram of salt. 

Sorbitol — Commercially Sorbitol suspension is 
available a 20 percent (w/v) activated charcoal in 70 
percent Sorbital. In serious patients 300 ml of 
undiluted solution and in ambulatory or less serious 
patients 300 ml diluted with water in ratio of 1 : 1 (that 
is 35 percent solution) is given. For children 
reconraiended doses are 4.3 ml/kg of commercial 
solution diluted to 1 : 1. 

Precautions — Magnesium cathartics should be 
avoided in patients with pre-existing renal failure or in 
those who are likely to develop renal dysfunction. 
Sodium cathartics should be avoided in severe 
hypertension, renal failure and heart failure. 
Cathartics use should be avoided in case of ingestion 
of corrosives, severe diarrhoea, paralytic ileus, 
electrolyte imbalance or recent bowel surgery. 

7.2.1.7 Measures to enhance elimination 

The following measures may be taken to enhance 
elimination: 

i) Forced diuresis and pH alteration 

Forced diuresis or alteration of the urinary pH may 
enhance the renal excretion of certain poisons. 
Altering the urinary pVt may increase the excretion of 
certain weakly acidic or basic drugs by increasing the 
amount of the ionized (polar) form in the urine for 



IS 4015 : 1998 



example 2, 4-Dichlorophenoxy acetic aid (2, 4-D), 
poisoning cases may get benefit from alkaline 
diuresis. 

ii) Extracorporeal removal 

Peritoneal dialysis, hemodialysis, plasmapheresis 
exchange transfusion and haemoperfusion are capable 
of removing many toxin from the blood stream. 

7.2.1.8 Specific chemical antidotes 

Though for many of the pesticides specific chemical 
antidotes or specific pharmacological antagonists are 
not available, but wherever available, they should 
always be administered, as early as possible after 
establishment of diagnosis (see Table 2). 

7.2.1.9 Emergency treatment of a chemically injured 
eye 

Examine the eye and periorbital structures in good 
light by a magnifying glass. 0.5 percent buffered 
solution of tetracaine/xylocaine may be used as local 
anaesthetic for facilitating the examination of an 
injured eye. It may be instilled with a sXtfiXt 
dropper gently over the outer canthus. Irrigate eye, 
lids etc, thoroughly with isotonic saline (0.85 percent 
NaCl) for 10 to 15 min. It will reduce the XocdX injury 
and may be helpful in some cases to limit the systemic 
intoxication. If local ocular sign and symptoms arc 
severe than instill a 2 percent buffered sterile 
solution of fluorescein. Greenish areas of stain mark 
the regions where the conjunctiva, cornea or sclera 
is damaged and eroded. If, these areas arc 
extensive, a dry sterile pad should be applied to the eye 
and the patient should be referred to an 
ophthalmologist. 

8 SYMPTOMS, SIQ^, DIAGNOSIS AND 
TREATMENT OF PESTICIDE POISONING 

8.1 Orgaxiochlorine Compounds 

8.1.1 Signs and Symptoms 

The onset of symptoms after oral ingestion are 
within 45 min to several hours. Nausea and vomiting 
frequently occur after oral ingestion. However, the 
common symptoms of poisoning are due to CNS 
toxicity and manifest as apprehension, excitability, 
paraesthesia, dizziness, headache, disorientation and 
tremors. In severe cases stupor, coma and convulsions 
occur. Other features of exposure are cardiac 
arrhythmias, seizures with resultant hypoxemia, 
severe metabolic acidosis, respiratory depression 
and death. Hydrocarbon pneum onitis due to 
solvent vehicle (xylene, benzene, toluene) is also 
reported. 



8.1.2 Treatment 

If convulsions occur, place the victim in the left lateral 
decubitus position with the head down and put a 
padded tongue blades between the teeth to protect the 
tongue. Remove dentures. Aspirate oral and 
pharyngeal secretions and, if possible, insert an 
oropharyngeal airway to maintain an open air passage 
unobstructed by tongue. Avoid any stimuli which may 
provoke/exaggerate convulsions. 

8.1.3 To control convulsions drugs like diazepam, 
pheny toin sodium and phenobarbitone sodium may be 
administered. Diazepam dosage for adults is 5-15 mg 
/.v. at a rate of not more than 2 mg/min if 
necessary, repeat every 10-15 min to a maximum of 30 
mg. In children the dose is 0.25-0.40 mg/kg body 
weight, which may be repeated every 10-15 min, if 
necessary, to a maximum of 10 mg. While 
administering the diazepam, precaution is to be taken 
to adminster it slowly to avoid hypotension and 
respiratory depression. Facilities should be available 
for intubating the patient in case of diazepam related 
respiratory depression. If i.v. administration of 
diazepam is not possible then it may be given undiluted 
in dosage of 10 mg in adults and 5 mg in children by 
per rectum route. The same dosage may be repeated 
in 2 to 4 h if required. 



i) Phenytoin Sodium, 
(Dilantin, Epileptin) 



ii) Phenobarbitone 
Sodium (Luminal, 
Gerdinal) 



The dose is 15-18 
mg/kg at a rate not 
more than 50 
mg/min. 

5 mg/kg /.v., at a rate 
not more than 50 
mg/min repeated 
every 20 min upto a 
maximum of 3 doses. 
Respiratory 
depression and 
hypotension may 
occur as a result of 
i.v. administration. 



8.1.4 Decontaminate the patient concurrently. 
Monitor pulmonary ventilation and c^diac status. If 
ftvftilable cholestyramine mixed with pulpy fruit or 
liquid may be given in dose of 4 g, 4 times a day before 
meals and at bedtime. It accelerates the biliary-faecal 
excretion of the more slowly eliminated 
organochlorine compounds. 

— DO NOT GIVE EPINEPHRINE. OTHER 
ADRENERGIC AMINES OR ATROPINE. 

— DO NOT GIVE MILK, ANIMAL OR 
VEGETABLE OILS OR FATS BY MOUTH. 



IS 4015 : 1998 



8.2 Organophosphonis Compounds 

8.2.1 Symptoms and Signs 

Early symptoms of poisoning are headache, nausea, 
dizziness, anxiety and restlessness. Worsening of 
poison state, is manifest as muscle twitching, 
weakness, tremor, incoordination, vomiting, 
abdominal cramps, urinary and faecal incontinence, 
increased bronchial secretions, bronchospasm, cough 
and occasionally pulmonary oedema. Sweating, 
lacrimation, salivation, miosis, bradycardia, 
conduction block and hypotension also occurs. In 
severe cases twitching, fasciculation, weakness of 
muscles, diminished respiratory effort, hypertension, 
tachycardia, tremors, convulsions, confusion and 
coma may also occur. Rarely normal sized or dilated 
pupils (mydriasis) and cardiac conduction defects m t 
be seen. Usually recovery is within 24-48 h. In fatal 
cases the cause of death is increased pulmonary 
secretion and inadequate ventilation. Some patients 
develop intermediate syndrome after 34-96 h which is 
characterized by weakness of proximal limb muscles, 
neck flexors and respiratory paralysis manifesting as 
acute ventilatory insufficiency. 

8.2.2 Treatment 

Establish a clear airway by aspiration of bronchial 
secretions. Administer oxygen. In severe poisoning, 
it may be necessary to support pulmonary ventilation 
mechanically for several days. 

8.2.3 In adults administer atropine sulphate Lv. 1-5 
mg every 5 to 15 min till atropinization is achieved 
(that is flushing of skin, dry mouth, dilated pupils). In 
the process of atropinisation the pulse rate may go upto 
140/min. No maximum dosage have been prescribed, 
even dosage of upto 200 mg during 1st hour of 
treatment has been given. The signs of atropine 
intoxication are fever and delirium. Maintain 
atropinization for 2-12 h or longer depending on the 
severity of the poisoning. In children atropine in dose 
of 0.05 mg/kg body weight should be administered and 
repeated every 5-15 min until atropinization is 
achieved. Maintain atropinization by repeated doses 
of 0.02-0.05 mg/kg body weight. 

Administer pralidoxime (protopam, 2-PAM), a 
cholinesterase reactivator in case pf severe poisoning 
by organophosphorus compounds. 1.0 to 2.0 g 
dissolved in 100 ml of normal saline i. v. over a period 
of 15-20 min may be administered in adults at a rate 
not more than 0.2 g/min. In children doses are 20-50 
mg/kg body weight /.v., injecting not more than half 
the total dose per minute. Doses of pralidoxime may 
be repeated in 1-2 h, then at 10-12 h intervals if 
needed. Blood pressure should be monitored during 
Lv. administration because of occasional occurrence of 



hypertensive crises. If seizure activity develops 
oxygenation benzodiazepines and antidotal therapy 
should precede the use of barbiturates or phenytoin. 

8.2.4 Decontamination of skin, eyes or gut as the case 
may be continued simultaneously. Monitor 
respiratory and cardiac status. Patient must be 
observed closely for atleast 96 h or longer in case of 
organophosphate ingestion for occurrence of 
intermediate syndrome. For intermediate syndrome 
only symptomatic treatment is required. 

8.3 Carbamates 

8.3.1 Signs and Symptoms 

Sign and symptoms of carbamate poisoning are similar 
to the organophosphate poisoning, but are less severe 
and has a shorter duration. 

8.3.2 Treatment 

Establish clear airway. Administer oxygen. If 
required, ventilate the patient mechanically. 
Administer atropine sulphate i.v. in the doses as 
indicated in case of organophosphate poisoning. 

8 J.3 Persons not poisoned or only slightly poisoned 
by N-methyl carbamates (for example Baygon, Sevin, 
Furadan, Lannate, MIPC) may develop signs of 
atropine toxicity from such large doses. Fever, and 
delirium are the main signs of atropine toxicity. If 
these signs appear while patient is fully atropinized, 
atropine administration should be discontinued, at 
least temporarily, and severity of poisoning is 
re-evaluated. Use of pralidoxime is contraindicated in 
carbaryl and chemically related (N-methyl carbamate 
poisoning. However, in case of mixed poisoning of 
organophosphate and carbamate or unknown 
anti-cholinesterase poisoning with significant 
nicotinic effects like muscular fasciculation and 
muscle weakness etc, cautious administration of 
pralidoxime may have to be considered. 

Decontamination should be done concurrently. 
Monitor respiratory and cardiac status. Observe 
patient closely for atleast 24 to 48 h. The use of 
morphine, theophylline, phenothiazines and reserpine 
and succinyl choline is probably contraindicated in 
N-methyl carbamate poisoning cases. Adrenergic 
amines should be given only in cases of specific 
indication such as marked hypotension. 

8.4 Synthetic Pyrethroids 

8.4.1 Signs and Symptoms 

Mammalian toxicity is extremely low. Contact 
dermatitis (erythema, vesiculation, bullae) 
anaphylactoid reactions (pallor, tachycardia, 
diaphoresis) and rhinitis and asthma may occur 



IS 4015 : 1998 



following exposure. Symptoms usually begin several 
hours aftercutaneous exposure and resolves within 24 
h. Tremors, ataxia, laboured breathing and salivation 
may occur after heavy exposure. 

8.4.2 Treatment 

Treatment is supportive and symptomatic. Topical 
vitamin E may be used for paraesthesia due to 
pyrethroids containing an alphacyano group (for 
example Fenvalerate, Cypermethrin, Flycythrinate). 
Antihistaminics are effective in controlling most 
allergic reactions. Severe asthmatic reactions may 
require administration of epinephrine, theophylline 
and/or corticosteroids. 

8.5 Coumarin and Indandione (Anticoagulant) 
Rodenticides 

8.5. 1 Signs and Symptoms 

Clinical effects result from bleeding when compounds 
are consumed over several days. The casual ingestion 
of warfarin in a toddler will not result in symptoms; 
however, the new super warfarin rodenticides 
(difenacoum and brodifacoum) cause prolonged 
severe depression of clotting factors and mild bleeding 
in a dose of 0. 12 mg/kg. Acute clinical effects depend 
on the site of hemorrhage and include hemoptysis, 
hematuria, gastrointestinal bleeding, abdominal or 
back pain, haemarthrosis, epistaxis, cerebrovascular 
accidents and multiple ecchymotic lesions. Maximum 
depression of coagulation factors occurs 36-72 h after 
warfarin ingestion. The superwarfarin compounds 
produce coagulation defect lasting 6-8 weeks. 
However, depression of prothrombin time upto 8 
months has been reported after ingestion of 10 mg of 
Brodifacoum. 

8.5.2 Diagnosis 

Prothrombin time determination (if facilities exist) — 
An increase in prothrombin time occurs. Complete 
haemogram provide baseline to mesure blood loss 
prospectively. 

8.5.3 Treatment 

Administer specific antidote phytonadione (Vitamin 
Kl) orally in doses of 15-25 mg in adults and 5-10 mg 
in children alternatively aquamephyton may be given 
intramuscularly in doses of 5-10 mg in adults and 1-5 
mg in children. Vitamin Kl has a shorter duration of 
action and so must be given repeatedly. Antidotal 
therapy in cases of severe bleeding should be 
supplemented with transfusions of fresh blood or fresh 
frozen plasma. Determine prothrombin time and 
haemoglobin concentrations every 6-12 h to assess 
effectiveness of antihemorrhagic measures. Ferrous 
sulphate therapy may be given to rebuild lost 
erythrocyte mass. 



NOTE — Vitamin K3 (Menadione) and Vitamin K4 (Menadiol) 
are not specific antidotes for these anticoagulants. 

8.6 Halogen Fumigants 

8.6.1 Signs and Symptoms 

Early symptoms of acute poisoning include headache, 
dizziness, nausea, vomiting, tremor and ataxia. 
Repeated prolonged exposure may lead to 
incoordination, muscle weakness and areflexia. In 
case liquid comes in contact with skin, severe burning, 
blister formation and skin necrosis may occur. 
Ethylene dibromide causes severe irritation of skin, 
eyes and respiratory tract. The liquid causes bUstering 
and erosion of skin and is corrosive to eyes. After 
absorption person may suffer from pulmonary oedema 
and CNS depression. If ingested, the liquid forms 
often cause pulmonary oedema and shock within a 
minute. Death is due to respiratory or circulatory 
failure. If victim survives, injuries to the brain, liver 
and kidney are life threatening. 

8.6.2 Diagnosis 

Determination of blood bromide concentations if 
facilities available. Normal levels are less than 1 
mg/lOOml. 

8.6.3 Treatment 

No specific antidote is available, therefore treatment 
is supportive and symptomatic. Decontamination of 
skin, eyes or gut depending on the type of exposure. If 
pulmonary oedema occurs then treat it accordingly by 
placing the victim in a sitting position with a back rest 
and administer oxygen and furosemide, 40 mg i.v. 
Morphine 3.5 mg i.v. slowly may be administered to 
allay anxiety and promote deeper respiratory 
excursions. Aminophylline 0.25-0.5 g slowly i.v. may 
also be given. 

8.7 Phosphine Fumigant 

8.7.1 Signs and Symptoms 

Aluminium phosphide and zinc phosphide release 
phosphine gas upon contact with moisture and cause 
fatalities. Zinc phosphide hydrolyses slowly as 
compared to aluminium and magnesium phosphide. 
The fatal dose of aluminium phosphide for a 70 kg 
adult is 0.5 g. For zinc phosphide lethal dose veries, 
but most fatal cases have ingested more than 20 g zinc 
phosphide. Ingestion of phosphides may cause 
nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, retrosternal and 
abdominal pain, tightness in the chest and coughing, 
headache and dizzi;iess. In more severe cases this may 
progress to cardiovascular collapse, pulmonary 
oedema, cyanosis and respiratory failure. Pericarditis, 
renal failure, and hepatic damage including jaundice, 
may develop later. Symtoms may be delayed and 
death may occur upto one week after posioning. 



10 



IS 4015 : 1998 



Inhalation of phosphine or phosphide may cause 
severe pulmonary irritation. Mild exposure may cause 
only mucous membrane irritation, with initial 
symptoms mimicking an upper respiratory tract 
infection. Other symptoms may include nausea, 
vomiting, diarrhoea, headache, fatigue, and coughing 
whilst more severe symptoms may include* ataxia, 
paraesthesia, intention tremor, diplopia and jaundice. 
Very severe cases may progress to acute pulmonary 
oedema, cardiac arrhythmias, convulsions, and coma. 
Renal damage and leukopenia may also occur. 
Exposure to 1 400 mg/cubic metre (1 000 ppm) for 30 
min may be fatal. There is no evidence for cumulative 
effects from intermittent low level exposure averaging 
14 mg/ cubic metre (10 ppm or less). 

8.7.2- Diagnosis 

The typical garlic odour of phosphine is best guideline 
for diagnosis. Change of silver nitrate impregnated 
paper to black after treatment with victim's vomitus or 
gastric aspirate confirms the diagnosis. 

8.7.3 Treatment 

No specific antidote is available, therefore, treatment 
remains supportive and symptomatic. Serum 
electrolytes should be frequently monitored and 
maintained. Cardiac monitoring should be done for 
cardiac arrythmias and blocks. Xylocaine (Xylocard) 
2-3 mg /. v./kg bolus followed by 1-4 mg/ kg/hour may 
be given in cases of ventricular arrhythmias till 
arrhythmias stop. It may be continued till 24 to 48 h 
depending on the condition of patient. For block, 
pacemaker may be implanted, if facilities exist. 
Aluminium phosphide will release phosphine gas in 
stomach, if it comes in contact with water. Therefore, 
if ipecac is administered, it should perhaps be not 
followed with fluids. Gastric lavage may also be 
dangerous. If activated charcoal is administered, it 
should perhaps be mixed with sorbitol not with water. 
For maintenance of blood pressure, give 1-2 1 normal 
saline or Ringer lactate. If there is no improvement in 
blood pressure then central venous line should be put 
in and a pressure of 8-12 cm of water is to be 
maintained with /.v. fluids. If central venous pressure 
is more than 12 cm of water or /.v. fluids fails to 
increase the blood pressure, start dopamine drip at rate 
of 10 |lg/kg/min and titrate according to blood 
pressure. Magnesium sulphate has been tried in 
aluminium phosphide poisoning cases. However, its 
therapeutic efficacy has not been established. If 
facilities arc available, the magnesium levels should 
be monitored, if magnesium sulphate therapy is to be 
given. 3 g of magnesium sulphate in 500 ml of 5 
percent dextrose should be given in first 3 h. This is 
followed by 6.0 g in 500 ml of 5 percent dextrose in 
next 24 h. 



8.8 Phenolics, NitrophenoHc and Nitrocresolic 
Herbicides 

This does not include the household disinfectants like 
Carbolic Acid, Phenol, Cresol, etc. 

8.8.1 Signs and Symptoms 

Yellow staining of skin and hair occur as a result of 
topical contact and systemic absorption of toxic 
amount of nitrophenolic and nitrocresolic compounds. 
It results in staining of sclera and urine. Early 
symptoms of poisoning include sweating, thirst, fever, 
headache, confusion, malaise and lassitude. Warm 
flushed skin, tachycardia, tachypnoea, convulsions, 
laboured breathing and cyanosis are indicative of 
severe poisoning. 

8.8.2 Diagnosis 
Clinical. 

8.8.3 Treatment 

Do not await confirmation before commencing 
treatment but save urine and blood samples for 
confirmation. No specific antidote exists. Treatment 
is symptomatic and supportive. Decontamination, 
reduction of elevated body temperature by physical 
means (like sponge bath, cool blankets etc), i.v. fluids 
and diazepam in cases with agitation and involuntary 
motor activity may be attempted. Haemodialysis (if 
facilities exist) may be considered in very severe cases. 

NOTE — Do not administer atropine, aspirin or other salicylates 
which may enhance the toxicity of phenols. 

8.9 Chlorphenoxy Compounds 

8.9.1 Signs and Symptoms 

The compounds are moderately irritant to skin, eyes 
and respiratory and gastrointestinal tract. Inhalation 
of spray may cause burning sensation in nasopharynx 
and chest and coughing may results in coughing. 
Ingesion of large quantities cause irritation of stomach, 
vomiting, pain in chest and abdomen, diarrhoea, 
headache, mental confusion, bizzare behaviour and 
finally unconciousness. Myotonia (stiffness of 
muscles of extremities) occurs in 2, 4-D poisoning. 
Areflexia is sometimes observed body temperature 
may be moderatley elevated. Metabolic acidosis, 
moderate temporary elevations of blood urea nitrogen 
and serum creatinine, liver cell injury, T-wave 
flattening and inversion have been reported. 

8.9.2 Diagnosis 
Clinical. 

8.9.3 Treatment 

START TREATMENT IMMEDIATELY. 

Treatement is symptomatic and supportive. No 



11 



IS 4015 : 1998 



specific antidote exists. Decontaminate eyes, skin 
and/or gut depending on the exposure. Lv. fluids may 
be given a urine flow of 4-6 ml/min is desirable to limit 
concentration of the toxicant in the kidney. Forced 
alkaline diuresis alkalinization of urine by adding 
sodium bicarbonate (44-88 mEq/litre) in i.v. fluids is 
effective. Urine /?H should be maintained in the range 
of 7.6 to 8.8. Potassium chloride 20-40 mEq/litre may 
be added in i.v. fluids to combat the potassium losses. 

8.10 Thiocarbamates and Related Compounds 

8. 10. 1 Signs and Symptoms 

They are moderately irritating to human skin, eyes and 
respiratory mucous membranes. SYSTEMIC 
POISONING IS RARE but in high dosage nausea, 
vomiting, headache, diarrhoea hypothermia, ataxia 
and muscle weak-ness occur which m.ay result in 
respiratory paralysis. If high dosage of thiram and 
metallic bis-dithiocarbamate are ingested with alcohol 
then disufiram like reaction may occur. 

8.10.2 Diagnosis 

Clinical and estim.ation of urinary xanthurenic acid for 
confirming the absorption of thiram. 

8.10.3 Treatment 

No specific antidote exists, therefore treatment is 
supportive and symptomatic. Decontaminate of skin, 
eyes and gut. Administer i.v. fluids to accelerate 
excretion of toxicants. In case of dithiocarbamate 
(Ziram) poisoning ascorbic acid in dose of 10-20 
mg/kg may be administered /. v. at a rate not exceeding 
0.2 g/min "AVOID INTAKE OF ALCOHOLIC 
BEVERAGES FOR THREE WEEKS". 

8.11 Bypyridyiium (Paraquat and Diquat) 

8.11.1 Signs anttSymptoms 

Corrosive effects of paraquat leads to early symptoms 
of burning pain in mouth, throat chest and upper 
abdomen. Giddiness, headache, fever, myalgia and 
diarrhoea also occur. Proteinuria, haematuria, pyruria 
and azotemia reflect renal injury while oliguria and 
anuria indicate tubular necrosis. Cough, dypnoea, 
tachypnoea, progressive cyanosis, air hunger are the 
pulmonary mainfestations which can appear 2-14 
days after exposure. Late complications include 
pulmonary fibrosis which is the cause of death in most 
of the cases. Other manifestations are hepatic failure 
and toxic myocarditis. Classical sign of paraquat 
poisoning is formation of a pharyngeal membrane 
which resembles that of diphtheria. Local effects of 
concentrated form are fissures of the skin, loss of 
fingernails, dryness, blistering and ulceradon. 
Inhalation causes bleeding from nose. Eye contact 
leads to severe conjuctivitis and corneal opacification. 



Occurrence of vomiting due to poisoning or due to 
addition of emetic in the paraquat preparations should 
not give false sense of security to the treating physician 
and treatment for poisoning should be continued. 
Diquat is less damaging to skin than paraquat. Early 
symptoms are similar to those of paraquat but 
pulmonar>' injury is less prominent. However, the 
toxicity to CNS is more as compared to paraquat. 

8.11.2 Diagnosis 
Clinical. 

8.11.2.1 Simple colorimetric test of urine 

Take one volume of urine. Add 0.5 ml of freshly 
prepared I percent sodium hydrosulphite in 1 N 
sodium hydroxide. Development of blue colour at the 
end of 1 min indicate the presence of paraquat at a 
concentration of more than 0.5 mg/1. 

8.11.3 Treatment 

No specific antidote is available, therefore treatment 
is symptomatic and supportive. Decontaminate skin 
and eyes. If paraquat or diquat have been ingested in 
any amount IMMEDIATE ADMINISTRATION OF 
ADSORBENT is the therapeutic measure most likely 
to affect the outcome of paraquat or diquat ingestion 
favourably BENTONITE (7.5 percent suspension) 
and FULLER'S EARTH (30 percent suspension) are 
highly effecrive, but sometimes not available. 
Administration of activated charcoal along with 
sorbital in suspension is also beneficial. Because 
corrosive damage to the osophagus and stomach may 
render these structures vulnerable to perforation, the 
gastric lavage tube must be introduced very gently. 
CHECK FREQUENTLY FOR BOWEL SOUNDS. 
Ileus occurs commonly in diquat poisoning but less 
often in paraquat poisoning. Cathartics should not be 
administered if the gut is atonic. Morphine sulphate 
may be given to control the pain associated with deep 
mucosal erosion of mouth, pharynx and oesophagus. 
Mouth washes, cold fluids, ice creams or anaesthetic 
lozenges may relieve pain in the mouth and throat. 
Haemoperfusion and haemodialysis may be 
considered, however these may offer only marginal 
benfit. 

NOTE — DO NOT ADMINISTER SUPPLEMENTAL 
OXYGEN because it may enhance the pulmonary injury. 

8.12 Urea Derivatives 

8.12.1 Signs and Symptoms 

Irritation of eyes and mucous membrane occur with 
some compounds. Ingestion of large quantities may 
result in nausea, vomiting and diarrhoea. 

8.12.2 Diagnosis 
Clinical. 



12 



IS 4015 ; 1998 



8.12.3 Treatment 

No specific antidote is available, therefore treatment 
is supportive and symptomatic. 

8.13 Arsenical Compounds 

8. 13. 1 Signs and Symptoms 

Symptoms usually appear within I h but may be 
delayed for several hours. Garlic odour of breath and 
feces may halp to identify the toxicant in severely 
poisoned patient. Inflammation of mouth, pharynx and 
oesophagus, or bloody diarrhoea, proteinuria, 
hematuria, glycosuria, oligouria, casts in urine and in 
severe cases acute tubular necrosis may occur. 
Headache, dizziness, muscle weakness, spasms, 
hypothermia, lethargy, delirium, coma, convulsions, 
shock, cyanosis and cardiac arrhythmias may also 
occur. Injury to blood forming tissues may result. 

8.13.2 Diagnosis 

8.13.2.1 Clinical and gutzeit test 

Add 5 ml of urine to few drops of concentrated 
sulphuric acid and few granules of elemental zinc. 
Cover the top of the tube with a piece of filter paper to 
which a drop or two of 1 percent silver nitrate solution 
has been added. Browning or blackening of the paper 
indicates that arsine has been evolved from the urine. 

8.13.3 Treatment 

The general supportive treatment remains the same 
except that the catiiartics should not be administered. 



Specific antidote BAL or dimercaprol given 
intramuscularly increases the excretion of arsenic. 



Doses schedule 



1st day 
3rd day 
4th day 
NOTES 



Severe poisoning 

3.0 mg/kg every 
4 hourly 

3.0 mg/kg 
every 6 hourly 

3.0 mg/kg 
every 12 hourly 



Mild poisoning 

2.5 mg/kg every 
6 hourly 

2.5 mg/kg 
every 12 hourly 

2.5 mg/kg 
per day 



1 DimercaptDl is provided as a 1 00 mg/ml solution in oil . It may 
produce some side effects like nausea, headache, burning and 
tingling sensation, sweating, pain in back and abdomen, tremors, 
restlessness, tachycardia and hypertension. Fever, coma and 
convulsions may occur at very high doses. Sterile abscess may 
form at injection sites. Acute symptoms usually subside in 30-90 
min. Antihistaminic drugs given few minutes before injection 
of BAL may prevent some of the side effects. After the 
gastrointestinal tract is free of arsenic (indicated by passage of 
charcoal black stool, if activated charcoal is given) BAL should 
be replaced by d- penicillamine orally. Dosage is as follows: 

Adults : d-penicillamine 0.5 g 6 hourly 30-60 min before 
meals and bedtime for 5 days. 

Children under 12 years of age d-penicillamine 0. 1 g/kg body 
weight not exceeding 1 .0 g divided into 4 doses given 30-60 
min before meals and at bedtime for 5 days. 

2 d-penicillamine should not be given to individuals allergic to 
penicillin. Discontinue chelation therapy when 24 h urinary 
arsenic excretion falls below 50 mg/day. 

8.13.4 Various pesticides, their groups, acute LD 
50 and antidotes are given in Table 2. 



13 



IS 4015 : 1998 



Table 2 

(Clausesl2.\.SamlSA3A) 



SI 

No. 

(1) 


Name of Pesticides 

(2) 


Group/Chemical Family 

(3) 


Acute LD 50 
(mg/kg b.wt) 
Oral/Dermal 

(4) 


1. 


Acephate 


In/O.P 


945/2000 


2. 


Alachlor 


HR/Anilides/Acetamide 


930/13300 


3. 


Aldicarb 


In/Caibamate 


0.93/5.0 


4. 


Allethrin 


In/Pyrethroids 


685/>2500 


5. 


alpha Naphthyl 
acetic acid 


IPGR/Carboxyiic Acid 
derivative 


1000 


6. 


alpha-cypemiethrin 
(Alphamethrin) 


In/Pyrethroids 


79/>500 


7. 


Aluminium phosphide 


Fu/Inorganic 




8. 


Anilophos 


HR/O.P 


400 


9. 


Atrazine 


HR/Triazine 


3080/7500 


10. 


Aureofungin 


Anti fungal/Antibiotic 


540/15000 


11. 


Barium Carbonate 


RO/Inorganic 


900 


12. 


Benomyl 


Fg/Benzimidazole 


10000/> 10000 


13. 


Benzene Hexachloride 
(BHC) 


In/OC 


100 


14. 


Benthiocarb 
(Thiobencarb) 


HR/Carbamate 


1300/>200 


15, 


Bitertano! 


Fg/Triazole 


5000/>5000(rat) 


16. 


Bromadiolone 


RO/Coumarin 


1.12/2.1 


17. 


Butachlor 


HR/Acetamide/Anilide 


3300/> 13000 


18. 


Captafol 


Fg./Phthalimide 


5000/> 15400 


19. 


Captan 


Fg./Phthalimide 


9000/15400 


20. 


Carbaryl 


In/Thiocaibamate 


500/>2000 


21. 


Cartap Hydrochloride 


In/Thiocarbamate 


325/>1000 


22. 


Carbendazim 


Fg./Benzimidazole 
carb 


15000/10000 


23. 


Carbofuran 


In/Carbamate 


5.0/2550 


24. 


Carboxin 


Fg./Anilide 


3820/>8000 


25. 


Chlormequatchloride 
(CCC) 


PGR 


670/440 


26. 


Chlorpyriphos 


IN/OP 


135/2000 


27. 


Chlorothalonil 


Fg/Phthalimide 


10000/10000 


28. 


Copper Oxychloride 


Fg/lnorganic copper comp. 


1440 


29. 


Copper Sulphate 


Fg/Inorganic copper 
compound 


300 


30. 


Coumachlor 


Ro/Coumarin 


900/33(rat) 



Antidote 



(5) 



Atropine, possibly in conjunction with 
PAM. 

No specific antidote, symptomatic and 
supportive therapy. 

Atropine 

No specific antidote, symptomatic and 
supportive therapy. 

-do- 

No specific antidote, symptomatic 
treatment, if ingested do not induce 
vomiting or give liquids 

No specific antidote, symptomatic and 
supportive therapy. 

Atropine in conjunction with 2-PAM. 

No specific antidote symptomatic and 
supportive therapy. 

-do- 

Symptomalic and supportive therapy. Add 
5- lOg of sodium sulphate to lavage solution. 

No specific antidote, sympotmatic and 
supportive therapy. 

No specific antidote, symptomatic 
treatment.Give (.v. Diazepam to control 
convulsions. 

Atropine 

No specific antidote, symptomatic and 
supportive therapy. 

Vitamin Kl 

No specific antidote, symptomatic and 
supportive therapy. 

-do- 

-do- 

Atropine 

Sulphydryl agents, i.v. injections of 
L-Cysteine or l.M. Injections of BAL, apply 
steroids against dermatitis. 

No specific antidote, symptomatic and 
supportive therapy. 

Atropine, if in eyes then 1 drop of 
homatropine. 

No specific antidote, symptomatic and 
supportive therapy. 

Choline chloride (or other choline salts) 
scholine salts) or neostigmine sulphate 

Atropine, possibly in conjunction with 
PAM. 

No specific antidote, symptomatic and 
supportive therapy. 

-do- 

-do- 

Vitarain K 1 



14 



Table 2 —Continued 



IS 4015 : 1998 



SI 


Name of Pesticides 


Group/Chemical Family 


Acute LD SO 


No. 






(mg^gb.wt) 
Oral/Dermal 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


31. 


Coumatetralyl 


Coumarin 


16/25-50 


32. 


Cuprous Oxide 


Fg/Inorganic copper 
compound 


470/n.a 


33. 


Cypermethrin 


In/Pyrethroids 


303/>2400 


34. 


Dalapon 


HR/OC, Ali Carboxylic acid 


9330/>2000 


35. 


Decaethrin 
(Deltamethrin) 


In/Synthetic Pyrethroid 


80/>2000 


36. 


Dichlorodipheny] 

1 trichloro ethane(DDT) 


In/OC 


113/2510 


37. 


Oiazinon 


In/OP 


300/540-650 


38. 


Djchlorvos 


In/OP 


56/107 


39. 


Dichloropropene and 
Dichloropropane 
Mixture {DD Mixture) 


Fu/Halocarbon 




40. 


Dicofol 


AC/DC, Bridged Diphenyl 


690/2100 


41. 


Diflubenzuron 


In/Urea Derivative 


4620/>2000 


42. 


Dimethoate 


In/OP 


150/800. 


43. 


Dinocap 


Fg/Nitrophenol 


980/4700 


44. 


Dithianoti 


Fg/Quinone 


638 


45. 


Diuron 


HR/Urea derivative 


3400 


46. 


Dodine 


Fg/Guanidine 


1000/>1500 


47. 


24-Dichlorophenox- 


HR/Chlorophenoxy 


375/>1600 



yacetic acid (2, 4-D) 
Sodium, Anine & Ester Salt 

48. Ehtylene Dichloride and 
Carbon Tetrachloride 
Mixture {EDCT Mixture 3:1) 



49. 


Edifenphos 


Fg/OP 


150/700-800 (rats) 


50. 


Endosulfan 


In/OC. Sulfurous acid 
derivative 


80/360 


51. 


Ethepon 


PGR/Ethylene 
generation 


4000/5730 


52. 


Ethion 


In/OP 


208/915 


53. 


Etofenprox 


Bridged diphenyl 


NA/>2140 


54. 


Ethylene Dibromide 


Fu 


146mg/kg/n.a 



55. Fenarimol 



Fg 



2500/>2000 



Antidote 



(5) 

Vitamin Kl 

BAL and subsequent penicillamine 

administration. 

No specific antidote, symptomatic 

treatment. If ingested do not induce 

vomiting or give liquids. 

No specific antidote, symptomatic and 
supportive therapy. 

-do- 

-do- 

Atropine, possibly in conjunction with 
PAM. 

-do- 
No specific antidote, symptomatic and 
supportive therapy. 

-do- 

-do- 

Atropine, possibly in conjunction with 
PAM. 

No specific antidote, symptomatic and 
supportive therapy. 

-do- 

-do- 

-do- 

-do- 



Treatment of Ethylene 

Dibromide and carbon tetrachloride. 

Alropine, possibly in conjunction with 
PAM. 

No specific antidote, symptomatic 
treatment. 

No specific antidote, symptomatic and 
generation supportive therapy. 

Atropine, possibly in conjunction with 

PAM. 

No specific antidote, symptomatic and 

supportive therapy. 

No specific antidote, symptomatic and 

supportive therapy. In Acidosis, 

Sod .bicarbonate is administered and urine is 

monitored. After inhalation move victim to 

fresh air, keep lying down and warm. 

No specific antidote, symptomatic and 
supportive therapy. 



56. Fenitrothion In/OP 

57. Fenthion |n/OP 



503/890-1300 Atropine, possibly in conjunction with 

PAM. 

291-315/330 -do- 



15 



IS 4015 : 1998 



Table 2 — Continued 



SI Nam e of Pesticides 
No. 

(1) (2) 

58. Fenvalerate 

59. Ferbam 

60. FluchJoralin 

61. Formothion 

62. Fluvalinate 

63. Fosetyl-Al 

64. Glyphosate 



Group/Chemical Family Acute LD SO 

(mg/kg b.wt) 
Oral^ermal 

(3) (4) 



[fi/Pyrethroids 

Fg/Dithiocarbamate 

HR 
In/OP 

In/Pyrethroids, 
Trifluromethyl 

Fg/OP, Organoalumi 
HR/OP,Glycine derivative 



45I/2500 

1700 

550 

3655/>10O0 

261/>2000 

5400/>2000 

43/5000 



Antidote 



(5) 



No specific antidote, if ingested perfc 
gastric lavage. 



fonr, 



No specific antidote, symptomatic and 
supportive therapy. 

-do- 

Atropine. possibly in conjunction with 
PAM. 

No specific antidote, symptomatic treatment 
gastric lavage. 

No specific antidote, symptomatic and 

supportive therapy. 

-do- 



65. Gibbercllic acid 

66. Isoproturon 

67. Kitazin 

68. Lindane(GammaBHC) 

69. Lime Sulphur 

70. Malathion 

7 1 . Meieic Hydrazide 

72. Methomyl 

73. Methylchlorophenoxy 
acetic acid (MCPA) 

74. Metolachlor 

75. Mancozeb 



79. Methyl Parathion 

80. Methyl Bromide 
Ethylene Dibromide 
(1:1&3:1) 

81. Metoxuron 



82. Metribuzin 

83. Monocrotophos 

84. Metalaxyl 

85. Mickel Chloride 



PGR 

HRAJrea derivative 

Fg 
In/OC 

In/OP 
PGR/Pyridazine 

In/Carbamate 
HR/Chlorphenoxy 

Acetamide 
Fg/Dithiocaibamte 



In/OP 



HR/Unea 

HR/Triazine 

In/OP 

Fg/'Acylalariine 

Fg/Inorganic 



>15000 

I80(y>2000(rat) 

490 

88.900 

2100/4100 
6950/>2000 

17/>5000 
70W> 1000 (rat) 

2780/3100 
8000/> 10000 (rat) 



76. 


Metaldehyde 


MO/Aldehydes 


60a/>5000 


77. 


Methaben zthtazuron 


HR/Urea 


2500/>500(rat) 


78. 


Methyl Bromide 


Fu 


0.63 (6 hours) 



14.0/420 



3200>2000(rats) 

2200/>20000 
14.0/130-250 
&70/>3iOO 

135 



-do- 

-do- 

-do- 

-do- 

-do- 

Atropine, possibly in conjuction with PAM. 

No specific antidote, symptomatic and 

supportive therapy. 

Atropine 

No specific antidote, symptomatic and 

supportive therapy. 

No specific antidote, symptomatic treatment 

No specific antidote, symptomatic 

treatment, if swalloved induce vomiting 

wash out the stomach administer 

saline !a.xa!ves. provide circulatory support, 

etc. 

No specific antidote, .symptomatic and 

supportive therapy. 

-do- 
No specific antidote, symptomatic. In 
Acidosis, Sod, bicarbonate is administered 
and urine is monitored. After inhalation, 
move victim to fresh air, keep lying down 
and warm. 
Atropine, possibly in conjuction with PAM. 

See Methyl Bromide and Ethylene 
Dibromide. 

No specific antidote, symptomatic and 
derivatives supportive therapy. 

-do- 

Atropine, possibly in conjuction with PAM. 

No specific antidote, symptomatic and 

supportive therapy, 

No specific antidote, content symptomatic 

and supportive therapy. 



16 



IS 4015 : 1998 



Table 2 — Continued 



SI Name of Pesticides 
No. 



(1) 



(2) 



86. Nicotine Sulphate 

87. Oxydemetoti-metliyl 

88. Oxyfluorfen 

89. Paradichlorobenzene 

90. Pendimethalin 

91. Permethrin 



98. Propanil 



Group/Chemical Family Acute LD 50 
(mg/kg b.wt) 
Oral/Dermal 

(3) (4) 



In/Allcaloids 

In/OP 

HR/Diplwnyl 
Ether, Trifluiomethyl 

Fg 

HR/Nitro Compound 

In/Pyrethroids 



92. 


Phenthoate 


In/OP 


93. 


Phorate 


In/ 


94. 


Phosalone 


In/Op 


95. 


Phosphamidon 


In/OP 


96. 


Pirimiphos-methyl 


In/OP 


97. 


Phenylmercuryacetate 
(PAM) 


Fg/Organomercury 



HR/Acetamide/AnUides 



99. 


Propetamphos 


OP 


100. 


Propoxur 


In/Carbamates 


101. 


Pyrethrum 


In/Pyrethnim 


102. 


Quinalphos 


In/OP 


103. 


Cart>aryl:Gaimna 
BHC(4:4) 


In/misc 


104. 


Simazine 


HR/Triazine 


105. 


S innate 


HR 


106. 


Sodium Cyanide 


Fu 


107. 


Streptocyline 
(streptomycin 
sulphate + 
tetracyclin 
hydrochloride(9:l) 


BC 


108. 


Sulphur 


Fg./lnorganic 


109. 


Temephos 


In/OP 


no. 


Triallate 


HR/OC,Carbanate 


111. 


Trichloro acetic acid 
(TCA) 


HR 


112. 


Trichlorphon 


In/OP/oC 


113. 


Tricyclazole 


OP 



50-60/50 
65/250 
5000/> 10000 

1000 

1050/>5000 

50W>2000 

400/2100 

2.0^.5-6.2 

120/>1000 

7.W267 

2018/>2000 

30 



1400^7000 

1 19/2825 

95/>500 

500/5000 

62/1750 



5000/> 10200 

2165 

6 

900 



AnUdote 

(5) 

-do- 

Atropine possibly in conjuction with PAM. 

No specific antidote, symptomatic and 
supportive therapy. 

No speciflc antidote, symptomatic and 
supportive therapy. 

No specific antidote, symptomatic, if 
ingested do not induce vomiting. 

No specific antidote, symptomatic tieament. 
If ingested obtain immediate medical 
attention. 

Atropine, possibly in conjunction with 
PAM. 

-do- 

-do- 

-do- 

-do- 

Stomach wash with 5 percent Sod bicar 
bonate solution, egg white or medicinal 
charcoal suspension, administer medical 
BALor Penicillamine. Give Sod.citrate (1-4 
gm orally) every 4 hours. 

No specific antidote, symptomatic 
andsupportive therapy. 

Atropine in conjuction with 2-PAM. 

Atropine 

No specific antidote, symptomatic 
treatment. 

Atropine, possibly in conjuction with PAM. 

See Carfoaryl and gamma BHC. 

No specific antidote, symptomatic and 
supportive therapy. 

-do- 

-do- 

-do- 



>3000 


-do- 


4600/1300-1930 


Atropint, possibly in conjunction with 
PAM. 


2165/3200 


-do- 


400 


-do- 


56(V>2000 


Atropine, possibly in conjunction with 
PAM. 


314/>2000 


Atropine, possibly in conjunction with 



2-PAM. 



17 



184015:1998 



Table 2 — Concluded 



SI Name of Pesticides 
No. 



(1) 



(2) 



1 14. Tridemorph 

115. Thiometon 

1 16. Thiram 



Group/Chemical FamUy Acute LD 50 
(mg/lcg b.wt) 
Oral/Dermal 

(3) (4) 

Fg/Morpholine/Anilides 65(V>4000 (rat) 



Antidote 



(5) 



In./OP 
Fg/EHthiocaibonjtte 



120/>1000 
56(V>1000 



No speciflc antidote, symptomatic and 
supportive then^y 

Atropine possibly in conjanction with PAM. 
No specific antidote, symptomatic 
andamatesupportive tlwrapy. If swallowed, 
induce vomiting, wash out the stomach, 
administer saline laxatives, provide 
circulatory support. 



117. 


Triadimefon 


Fg/Triazole 


602/>2000 


No specific antidote, symptomatic and 
supportive therapy. 


118. 
119. 
120. 


Thiophan ate-methy 1 

Triazophos 

Warfarin 


Fg/Benzimidazole caibonate 

In/OP 

RO/Cumarin 


6000/>10000 

66/1100 

10 


-do- 

Atropine, possibly in ccmjunction with PAM. 

Vitamin Kl Combined with blood 
transfusion. 


121. 


Zinc Phosphide 


RO/Inorganic 


45/2000-5000 


No specific antidote, symptomatic and 
supportive therapy. 


122. 


Zincb 


Fg./Dithiocarbamate 


>5200/6000 


No specific antidote, symptomatic 
treatment. If swallowed, induce vomiting, 
wash out stomach, administer saline 
laxatives, provide circulatory support. 


123. 
124. 


Ziram 
Bacillusthuringiensis 


Fg/Dithiocarbamate 
In/Biopesticide 


1400/>6000(rat) 
/>5000(rat) 


-do- 
No specific antidote, symptomatic 
treatment. 


125. 


Chlorobenzilate 


AC/Benzilate 


2784-3880/> 10.000 


-do- 


126. 


Chlorfenvinphos 


In/OP 


24-39/31-108 (rat) 


Atropine, possibly in conjunction with 
PAM. 


127. 


Cyfluthrin 


In/Pyrethroid 


500(oxylol)/>5000900 
(PEG 400)/20(water/ 
Gramphor) 


No specific antidote, symptomatic 
treatment. 


128. 


Dieldrin 


In/Cyclodiene (oc) 


46/50-120 


-do- 


129. 
130. 
131. 


d-trans allethrin 

Fenobucaib(BPMC) 

Hexaconazote 


In/Pyrethroid 
In/Cafbamate 
Fg./Triazole 


315/>2000 

524M/>5000(rat)425F 

2189M/>20006071F/ 


-do- 

Atropine 

No specific antidote, treat symptomatically. 


132. 
133. 
134. 
135. 


Iprodione 

Lambdacyhalothrin 
Myclobutanil 
Neem Products 


Fg./ImidazoIidine 
In/Pyrethroid 
Fg/Triazole 
In/Biopesticide 


>2000/>2500 
79M/1293-1507 56F/ 
1600M/50002290F 
>500Q/>10000 


-do- 
-do- 
-do- 
-do- 


136. 


Oxaxiazon 


HR/Oxadiazole 


>5000/2000 


-do- 


137. 
138. 


Oxycarboxin 
Paraquat dichloride 


Fg/Oxathion 
HR/Paraquat ion 


>2000/>16000 

157/236-500 

mg. Parqut ion/perks. 


-do- 
-do- 


139. 
140. 


Penconazole 
Prallethrin 


Fg/Triazole 
In/Pyrethroid 


2125/>3000(rat) 
640MA>5000(rat)460F/ 


-do- 
-do- 


141. 


Pretilachlor 


HR/Acetanilide 


6099/>3100 


-do- 


142. 


Profenofos 


In/OP 


358 3300 (rat) 


Atropine, possibly in conjunction with 
PAM. 


143. 


Propiconzole 


Fg./Triazole 


I517/>4000(rat) 


No specific antidote. Treat 
symptomatically. 


144. 


Trifluralin 


HR Dinitroaniline 


5000/>5000 


-do- 


145. 
146. 


Validamycin 
Methoxy ethyl mercury 
chloride 


Fg./Glucopymoside 
Fg./Organomercurial 


20000/>5000 


-do- 
D-penicillamine. 



18 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act^ 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and 
attending toxonnected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publication), BIS. 

Review nf Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue 
of *BIS Handbook* and 'Standards Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc: No. FAD 1 ( 4037 ). 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones: 323 01 31, 323 33 75, 323 94 02 

Regional Offices: 

Central 



Eastern 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola 
CALCUTTA 700054 



Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34- A, CHANDIGARH 160022 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 6001 13 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 
MUMBAI 400093 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHCPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 
COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAJD. JAJPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Telegrams: Manaksanstha 
(Common to all offices) 

Telephone 

323 76 17,323 38 41 



r337 84 99,337 85 61 
1337 86 26,337 9120 



{ 



60 38 43 
60 20 25 



r 235 02 16, 235 04 42 
123515 19,235 23 15 

/ 832 92 95, 832 78 58 
1832 78 91,832 78 92 



itinted at Simco ±%inting i^ess, Delhi, Lidia 



