*••••••••••*•••• 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 10322-4 (1984): Luminaires, Part 4: Methods of Tests 
[ETD 24: Illumination Engineering and Luminaries] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
"Step Out From the Old to the New" 



gyiaf/f/raa^^^:^^ 



S?St^ * I |>&B5^«%^Na«^ 



\\V^:5^< 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




ic 



j^- 



A 




BLANK PAGE 



^<*i^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



lS:10322(P«rt4).l9U 

( Reaffirmed 2005 ) 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR LUMINAIRES 

PART 4 METHO D S OF TESTS 



UDC 625-94 : 6201 







® Copfilfhi 1985 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR AlARG 

NEW DELHI HOD02 

Gr 9 Jflfff 19B5 



IS : 10322 ( I^art 4 ) . Id84 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR LUMINAIRES 

PART 4 METHODS OF TESTS 



Illuminating Engineering and Luminaires Sectional Committee, 

ETDG 45 

Chairman Representing 

Shbi G. K. Khemani Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 

Members 

Surveyor op Works ( Electrical )-III ( Alternate to 
Shri G. K. Khemani ) 
Shbi G. K. Aithal Bajaj Electricals Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi Jagdish Shaban ( -4//^rna/« ) 
Shbi P. K. Bandyopadhyay Peico Electronics & Electricals Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi P. K. Sanyal ( Alternate ) 
Shbi G. Bhattachabya National Test House, Calcutta 

Shbi P. C. Pradhan ( Alternate ) 
Shbi N. S. Chabi Crompton Greaves Ltd, Bombay 

Shri V. R. Majtjmdar ( Alternate ) 
Shbi N. S. Ghaei Association of Indian Engineering Industry, 

New Delhi 
Shri A- Mukherjee ( Alternate ) 
Shri H. N. Gupta Directorate General Factory Advice Services & 

Labour Institute ( Ministry of Labour ), 
Bombay 
Shbi V. S, Sasikumab (^/fcrna/ff ) 
Joint Dibectob Standabds Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) 
( Elect ) TLM, RDSO 
Deputy Director Standabds, 
TLM ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. V. Nabyanan Directorate, General of Supplies & Disposals, 

New Delhi 
Shbi Anil Gupta ( Alternate ) 
Shbi V. H. Navkal The Bombay Electric Supply & Transport Under- 

taking, Bombay 
Shri S. H. Millar ( Alternate ) 
Shri U. S. Nig am Central Mining Research Station ( CSIR ), 

Dhanbad 
1 Shri M. R. Paul ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1985 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) arid 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 10322 (Part 4) - 1984 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shbi S. B. Neyogi Directorate of Technical Development and 

Production ( Air ), New Delhi 
Shbi J. K. Ghosh ( Alternate ) 
Shbi J. R. Pari The General Electric Co of India Ltd, Calcutta 

Shbi S. K. Neogi {Alternate ) 
Lt-Col B. B= Ra-jpai Engineer-in-Chief' s Branch, Army Headquarters, 

New Delhi 
Shri R. S. Kanwar ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. S. Sabma National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New 

Delhi 
5hr1 K. F. Shanbhogub National Industrial Development Corporation 

Ltd, New Delhi 
Shbi G. S. Sbivastava Metallurgical Engineering & Consultants, 

Ranchi 
Shbi H. S. Saini ( Alternate ) 
Shbi H. Sinha Illuminating Engineering Society of India, 

Calcutta 
Shbi K. K. Rohatgi ( Alternate ) 
Shbi V. K. Sood The Mysore Lamp Works Ltd, Bangalore 

Shbi Subesh Dhinora ( Alternate ) 
Shbi P. N. Seinivasan PNS Lighting Design & Consultancy, Bangalore 

Shbi G. N. Thadani Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi 

Shbi S. K, Ghosh ( Alternate ) 
Shbi S. F. Sachdev, Director General, ISI ( Ex-offido member) 

Director ( Elec tech ) 

Secretary 

Shbi Stjkh Bib Sikgh 
Deputy Director ( Elec tech ), ISI 



Panel For Preparing Standards For Luminaire in Multipart, 
ETDG45:P11 

Convener 
Shbi P. K. Bandyopadhyay Peico Electronics & Electricals Ltd, Bombay 

Members 

Shbi P. K. Sanyal ( Alternate to 
Shri P. K. Bandyopadhyay ) 
Shbi N. S. Ghabi Crompton Greaves Ltd, Bombay 

Chief Enginbbb ( Elec )-II Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 

SuBVEYOR or WoBKS ( E )-III ( Alternate ) 
Shbi V. H. Navkal The Bombay Electric Supply & Transport 

Undertaking, Bombay 
Shbi S. H. Milleb ( Alternate ) 
Shbi J. R. Paei Genelec Limited, Bombay 

Shri K. S. Sabma National Physical Laboratory ( CSRI ), 

New Delhi 
Shbi P. N» Sbinivasan PNS Lighting Design and Consultancy, 

Bangalore 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 DECEMBER 2011 

TO 

IS 10322 (PART 4 ) : 1984 SPECIFICATION FOR LUMINAIRES 

PART 4 METHODS OF TESTS 

(Page 12, clause 3.3.4, Note 2) — Insert the following new clause at the end: 

'3.3.5 For the high-voltage transformers used for the test, when the output terminals are short-circuited 
after the output voltages have been adjusted to the appropriate test voltage, the output current shall be at 
least 200 mA. The over-current relay shall not trip when the output current is less than 100 mA. 

Care shall be taken that the rms value of the test voltage applied is measured within ±3 percent. 

Care shall also be taken that the metal foil is so placed that no flashover occurs at the edges of the 
insulation.' 



(ET 24) 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



IS : 10322 ( Part 4 ) - 1984 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR LUMINAIRES 

PART 4 METHODS OF TESTS 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 8 August 1984, after the draft finaUzed by the Illuminating Engineer- 
ing and Luminaires Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Electrotechnical Division Council. 

0.2 This standard ( Part 4 ) is one of the series of Indian Standards which 
deals with luminaires. This series consists of the following parts: 

Part 1 General requirements. 

Part 2 Constructional requirements, 

Part 3 Screw and screwless terminals, 

Part 4 Methods of tests, and 

Part 5 Particular requirements. 

0.3 In general, Parts 1, 2, 3 and 4 of this standatd cover safety 
requirements for luminaires. The object of these parts is to provide a set 
of requirements and tests which are considered to be generally applicable 
to most types of luminaires and which can be called up as required by the 
detail sepeifications under Part 5. Parts 1, 2, 3 and 4 are thus not to be 
regarded as a specification by itself for any type of luminaire, and its 
provisions apply only to particular type of luminaires to the extent 
determined by the appropriate section of Part 5. 

0.4 The sections of Part 5 in making reference to any other parts of the 
standard, specify the extent to which that section is applicable and the 
order in which the tests are to be performed; they also include additional 
requirements as necessary. The order in which the clauses in Parts 1, 2, 3 
and 4 are numbered, therefore, has no particular significance as the order 
in which their provisions apply is determined for each type of luminaire 
or group of luminaires by the appropriate section of the Parts 5. All 
sections of Part 5 are self-contained and therefore do not contain reference 
to other sections of Part 5. 

0.5 A luminaire shall comply with a section of Part 5, If, however, an 
appropriate section of Part 5 does not exist for a particular luminaire or 



IS t 10322 ( Part 4 ). 1984 

group of luminalres, the nearest applicable section of Part 5 may be used 
as a guide to the requirements and tests. 

0.6 This standard is intended to establish essential requirements of general 
nature and minimum standard for design and construction of lighting 
fittings in order to ensure iheir safe performance, good construction and 
high class of workmanship. This standard, therefore, along with other 
appropriate parts of this standard, will ultimately replace IS : 1913 
( Part 1 )-1978*. 

0.7 In the preparation of this standard assistance has been derived from 
lEG Publication: 598-1 ( 1979 ): * Luminaires Part 1 General requirements 
and tests ', published by International Electrotechnical Commission. 

0.8 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing 
the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2- 1960f. 
The number of significant places retained in the rounded off" value should 
be the sanie as that of the specified value in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

l.X This standard ( Part 4 ) covers the methods of tests applicable to 
luminaires for use with tungsten filament, tubular fluorescent and other 
discharge lamps on supply voltage not exceeding 1 000 V. 

2. RESISTANCE TO DUST AND MOISTURE 

2.1 Tests for Ingress of Dust and Moisture — The enclosure of dust- 
proof, dust-tight, drip-proof, rain-proof, splash-proof, jet-proof, watertight 
and pressure watertight luminaires shall provide the degree of protection 
against dust or moisture in accordance with the classification of the 
luminaire. 

Compliance shall b.c checked by the appropriate tests specified 
in 2.1.1 to 2.1.8. 

Before the tests of 2.1.3 to 2.1.8 the luminaire complete with lamp(s) 
shall be switched on and brought to a stable operating temperature at 
rated voltage. 

The water for the tests, specified in 2.1.3 to 2.1.8 shall be at a 
temperature of 15 ± 10°C. 

After completion of the tests, the luminaire shall withstand the 
electric strength test, as specified in 3 and inspection shall show: 

•Specification for general and safety requirements for luminaires: Part I Tubulas 
fLiiore^CGnt lurapi { second revision ) . 

fRuIes for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 



IS: 10322 ( Part 4 ) -1984 

a) No deposit of talcum powder in dust-proof luminaires, such that 
if the power were conductive, the insulation would fail to meet 
the requirements of this standard. 

b) No deposit of talcum powder inside enclosure for dust-tight 
luminaires. 

c) No trace of water on live parts or on insulation where it could 
become a hazard for the user or surroundings, for example where 
it could reduce the creepage distances below the values specified 
in 4. 

d) No accumulation of water in drip-proof, rain- proof, splash-proof 
and jet-proof luminaires or their protective glasses, such as 
would impair safety. 

e) No trace of water entered in any part of a watertight or pressure 
watertight luminaire. 

Fixed drip-proof, rain-proof, splash-proof and jet-proof luminaires 
complete with their protective translucent covers, if any, shall be mounted 
and wired as in normal use. 

Portable luminaires, wired as in normal use, shall be placed in the 
most unfavourable position of normal use. 

Glands, if any, shall be tightened with a torque equal to two-thirds 
of that applied to glands in the appropriate test specified in Part 2. 

Fixing screws of covers, other than hand-operated fixing screws of 
glass covers, shall be tightened with a torque equal to two-thirds of that 
specified in Table 1 of Part 2. 

Screwed lids shaJI be tightened with a torque having a value in 
newton metres numerically equal to one-tenth of the nominal diameter of 
the screw thread in millimetres. Screws fixing other caps shall be tightened 
with a torque equal to two-thirds of that specified in Table 1 of Pait 2. 

2.1,1 Test — Dust-proof luminaires ( first characteristic IP numeral 5 ) 
shall be tested in a dust chamber similar to that shown in Fig. 1 in which 
talcum powder is maintained in suspension by an air current. The chamber 
shall contain 2 kg of powder for every cubic metre of its volume. The 
talcum powder used shall pass through a square-meshed sieve whose 
nominal wire diameter is 50 ^m and whose nominal free distance between 
wires is 75 ^m and shall have a range of particle size down to and 
including 1 /^m with at least 50 percent by weight less than 5 /xm. it 
should not have been used for more than 20 tests. 

The luminaire shall be hung inside the chamber, brought up to 
operating temperature, switched off and left for 2*5 hours. The luminaire 



IS I 10322 ( ^tf rt 4 ) - 1984 




I 1 



GLASS WINDOW 



-EaUIPMENT UNDER 
TEST 



WIRE 
MESH 





VIBRATOR 



CIRCULATING PUMP 



Fig. 1 Apparatus for Proving Protection Against Dust 

is then switched on and operated under normal operating conditions for 
3 hours at the conclusion of which period it is switched ojff and left for a 
further period of 2*5 hours. The total testing time is thus 8 hours. 

2.1.2 Test — Dust-tight luminaircs ( first characteristic IP numeral 6 ) 
shall be tested in accordance with 2.1.1. 

2.1.3 Test — Dirp-proof luminaires (second characteristic IP numeral 1) 
shall be subjected for 10 minutes to an artificial rainfall of 3 mm/min, 
falling vertically from a height of 200 mm above the top of the Juminaire. 

2.1.4 Test — Rain-proof luminaires (second characteristic IP numeral 3) 
shall be sprayed with water for 10 minutes by means of a spray appara- 
tus as shown in Fig. 2. The radius of the semi-circular tube shall be as small 
as possible and compatible with the size and position of the luminaire. The 
tube shall be perforated so that jets of water are directed towards the 
centre of the circle and the water pressure at the inlet of the apparatus 
shall be approximately 80 kN/m*. 



IS : 10322 ( Part 4 ) - 1984 



MINIMUM INTERNAL DIAMETER 15mm 




-iV- 



0-/, mm DIAMETER HOLES 



R=200mmCR MULTIPLES THEREOF 





LUMINAIRE PkOTECTION 




Rain-proof 


Splash-proof 

± 180° 
db 90' 


Oscillation half-angle 
Holes within half-angle 


± 60*' 
± 60° 



Fig. 2 Apparatus for Testing Protection Against 
Rain and Splashing 

The tube shall be caused to oscillate through an angle of 120", 60° 
on either side of the vertical, the time for one complete oscillation 
( 2 X 120° ) being about 4 seconds. 

The luminaire shall be mounted above the pivot line of the tube so 
that the ends of the luminaire receive adequate coverage from the jets. 
The luminaire shall be turned about its vertical axis during the test at a 
rate of 1 rev/rnin. 

After 10-minute period, the luminaire shall be switched off and 
allowed to cool naturally whilst the water spray is continued for a further 
10 minutes, 

2.1.5 Test — Splash-proof luminaires ( second characteristic IP nume- 
ral 4 ) shall be sprayed from every direction with water for 10 minutes by 
means of the spray apparatus shown in Fig. 2 and described in 2.1.4. The 



IS t 10322 ( Part 4 ) - 1984 

luminaire shall be mounted under the pivot line of the tube so that the 
turned ends of the iuminaire receive adequate coverage from the jets. 

The tube shall be caused to oscillate through an angle of almost 
360", 180° on either side of the vertical, the time for one complete 
oscillation ( 2 X 360*" ) being about 8 seconds. The Iuminaire shall be 
about its vertical axis during the test at a rate of 1 rev/min. 

The support for the equipment under test shall be grid-shaped in 
order to avoid acting as a baffle. After 10-minute period, the Iuminaire 
shall be switched off and allowed to cool naturally whilst the water spray is 
continued for a further 10 minutes. 

2.1.6 Test — Jet-proof luminaires ( second characteristic IP numeral 5 ) 
shall be switched off and immediately subjected to a water jet for 
15 minutes from all directions by means of a hose having a nozzle with the 
shape and dimensions shown in Fig. 3. The nozzle shall be held 3 m from 
the sample. 

The water pressure at the nozzle shall be approximately 30 kN/m«, 




^^^S^^^sa 



^s^s^s^s^sssj 



zA 



D' : 6 • 3 m m 



PETAIL OF NOZZLE 



N0Z7LE 




PRESSURE GAUGE 



HOSE 



All dimensions in millimetres. 

Fig. 3 Nozzle for Spray Test 

2.1.7 Test — Watertight luminaires ( second characteristic IP numeral 
7 ) shall be completely immersed for 30 minutes in water, so that there is 



8 



IS : 10322 ( Part 4 ) - 1984 

at least 150 mm of water above the top of the luminaire and the lowest 
portion is subjected to at least 1 m head of water. 

Note — This treatment is not sufficiently severe for luminaires intended for 
operation under water. 

2.1.8 Test — Pressure watertight luminaires (second characteristic IP 
numeral 8 ) shall be heated, either by switching on the lamp or by other 
suitable means, so that the temperature of the luminaire enclosure exceeds 
that of the water in the test tank be between 5 and lO'^G. 

The luminaire shall then be switched off and subjected to a water 
pressure of 1*3 times that pressure which corresponds to the rated maxi- 
mum immersion depth for a period of 30 minutes. 

2.2 Humidity Test — All luminaires shall be proof against humid condi- 
tions which may occur in normal use. 

Compliance shall be checked by the humidity treatment described 
in 2.2.1, followed immediately by the tests of 3. 

Gable entries, if any, shall be left open; if knock-outs are provided, 
one of them shall be opened. 

Electrical components, covers, protective glasses and other parts 
which can be removed by hand shall be removed and subjected, if 
necessary, to the humidity treatment with the main part. 

2.2.1 Test — The luminaire shall be placed in the most unfavourable 
position in normal use, in a humidity cabinet containing air with a relative 
humidity maintained between 91 and 95 percent. The temperature of 
the air at all places where samples can be located shall be maintained 
within 1°G of any convenient value t between 20 and 30"^ G. 

Before being placed in the humidity cabinet, the sample shall be 
brought to a temperature between t and {t -\- 4: yC. 

The sample shall be kept in the cabinet for 48 hours. 

Note — In most cases, the sample may be brought to the specified ternperature 
between t and ( f + 4 )°G by keeping it in a room at this temperature for at least 
4 hours before the humidity treatment. 

In order to achieve the specified conditions within the cabinet, it is 
necessary to ensure constant circulation of the air within, and in general, 
to use a cabinet which is thermally insulated. 

After this treatment, the sample shall show no damage aflecting 
compliance with the requirements of this standard. 

3. INSULATION RESISTANCE AND ELECTRIC STRENGTH 

3.1 The insulation resistance and the electric strength of luminaires shall 
be adequate. 



IS s 10322 (Part4)- 1984 

3.1.1 Compliance shall be checked by the tests of 3.2 and 3.3 in the 

humidity cabinet or the room in which the sample was brought to the 
prescribed temperature, after reassembly of those parts which may have 
been removed. 

3.1.2 The switch, if any, shall be placed in the ON position for all tests, 
except for tests between live parts which are separated by the action of a 
switch. 

3.1.3 Shunt connected capacitors and capacitors between live parts and 
the body shall be disconnected during these tests as shall any choke or 
transformer connected between live parts. 

3.1.4 If it is impossible to place metal foil in position on linings or 
barriers, the tests shall be made on three pieces of the lining or barrier 
which have been taken out and placed between two metal balls having a 
diameter of 20 mm, which shall be pressed together with a force of 2 N. 

3.2 Insulation Resistance Test 

3.2.1 The insulation resistance shall be measured with a dc voltage of 
approximately 500 V, 1 minute after the application of the voltage. 

3.2.2 The insulation resistance shall not be less than the values specified 
in Table 1. 

TABLE 1 MINIMIJM INSULATION RESISTANCE 

Insulatioh Minimum Insulation 

Resistance ( MQ ) 



Luminaires 

Other Than 

Class ir 

2 
2 



Class II 
Luminaires 

2 

2 



Between live parts of different polarity 

Between live parts which can become of different 

polarity through the action of a switch 
Between live parts and the body* 
Between accessible metal parts and metal foil on the 

inside of insulating linings and barriers 
Basic insulation of Class II luminaires 
Supplementary insulation of Class II luminaires 
Bushings prescribed in Part 2 of this standard 
Insulation of anchorages prescribed in Part 2 of 

this standard 
Insulation of wire carriers or clips p r escribed in Part 2 2 2 

of this standard 

♦The term ' body * includes accessible metal parts, accessible fixing screws and metal 
foil in contact with accessible parts of insulating materials. 



2 
2 



4 
4 

2 
2 

4 
2 



10 



IS : 10322 ( Part 4 ) - 1984 

3.2.3 The insulation between live parts and the body of Glass II lumi- 
naires shall not be tested if the basic insulation and the supplementary 
insulation can be tested separately. 

3.2.4 Insulating linings and barriers shall be tested only if the distance 
between live parts and accessible metal parts would be less than that pres- 
cribed in Part 4 were the lining or barrier not there, or if the lining or 
barrier is necessary to comply with the requirement of appropriate 
clause in Part 2 of this standard. 

3.2.5 For the tests on the insulation of bushings, cord grips, wire 
carriers and clips, the cable or cord shall be covered by metal foil or 
replaced by a metal rod of the same diameter. 

3.2.6 These requirements do not apply to starting aids which are pur- 
posely connected to the mains if they are not live parts. 

Note — See Appendix A for a test for live parts. 

3.3 Electric Strength Test 

3.3.1 A voltage of substantially sine-wave form, having a frequency of 
50 or 60 Hz and the value specified in Table 2, shall be applied for 
1 minute across the insulation. 

TABLE 2 ELECTRIC STRENGTH 

{Clauses Z.ZA and Z.Z A) 
Insulation Test Voltage (V) 



Between live parts of different polarity 

Between live parts which can become of different 

polarity through the action of a switch 
Between live parts and the body* 
Between accessible metal parts and metal foil on the 

inside of insulation linings and barriers 

Basic insulation of Glass II luminaires 
Supplementary insulation of Glass II luminaires 
Bushings prescribed in Part 2 of this standard 
Insulation of anchorage prescribed in Part 2 of this 

standard 
Insulation of wire carriers or clips prescribed in Part 2 
of this standard 
U = Working voltage. Where the working voltage is 42 V or less, the test voltage 

shall be 500 V instead of ( 2U + 1 000 V ). 
♦The term ' body ' includes accessible metal parts, accessible fixing screws and metal 
foil in contact with accessible parts of insulating material ( reinforced insulation of 
class II luminaires ). 

11 



Other Than 

Class II 
Luminaires 

2U + 1 000 
2U + 1 000 


Glass II 
Luminaires 

2U + 1 000 
2U + 1 000 


2U + 1 000 
2U + 1 000 


2U + 3 500 
2U + 3 500 


2U + 1 000 
2U + 1 000 


2U + 1 000 
2 500 

2U 4- 3 500 
2 500 


2U + 1 000 


2 500 



IS i 10322 ( Part 4 ) - 1984 

3.3.2 Initially, no more than half the prescribed voltage shall be 
applied, then it is raised gradually to the full value. 

3.3.3 No flashover or breakdown shall occur during the test. 

3.3.4 These requirements do not supply to starting aids which are 
purposely connected to the mains if they are not live parts. 

Note 1 — For Class II luminaires incorporating both reinforced insulation and 
double insulation, care should be taken that the voltage applied to the reinforced 
insulation does not stress the basic insulation or the supplementary insulation more 
than they are stressed by the voltage specified in Table 2. 

Note 2 — Glow discharges which do not cause a drop in voltage ( when 
measured across the points of application ) should be neglected. 

3.4 Measurement of Leakage Current 

3.4.1 The luminaire shall be connected to a voltage equal to I'l times 
rated supply voltage at rated frequency. The current measured between 
each pole of the supply source and the metal body of the luminaire with 
and without lamps, shall not exceed the following values: 

All luminaires Glass and Glass II 0*5 mA 

Portable luminaires Glass I 1*0 mA 

Fixed luminaires Glass I 1-0 mA 

up to 1 kVA rated input, increasing 

by 1-0 mA/kVA up to a maximum of 5-0 mA 

The resistance of the measuring circuit shall be 2 000 i 50 Q. 
4. CREEPAGE DISTANCES AND CLEARANCES 

4.1 Live parts and adjacent metal parts shall be adequately spaced. 
Greepage distances and cl earances shall not be less than those specified in 
Table 3. 

Note — The minimum requirements of Table 3 are for luminaires of Class 
and Glass T which are intended for use in conditions where the risk of contamination 
due to condensation, dust or dirt is low. For use in other conditions where conta- 
mination may occur due to the nature of the work or surroundings, extra care is 
necessary in the protection of live parts and their insulation. 

4.2 Test — Compliance shall be checked by measurement made with and 
without conductors of the largest section connected to the terminals of the 
luminaires. 

The contribution to the creepage distance over the surface of any 
groove less than 1 mm wide shall be ignored when measuring the total 
surface path. 

Any part of the sealing compound protruding beyond the end of the 
cavity containing a live part shall be ignored in Item 6(b) of Table 3. 

12 



IS : 10322 ( Part:4 ) . 1984 



TABLE 3 GREEPAGE DISTANCES AND CLEARANCES 

(Clauses 4.1 and 4.2) 



vi) 



24 
(V) 

(2) 
2 



Creep AGE Distances and 

CliEAKANOES IN MiLLIMETk,£;S 

Between 

i -^ -^ 

Working voltage ( not 
exceeding ) 

(1) 
i) Live parts of different 
polarity 

ii) Live parts and accessible 
metal parts, also between 
live parts and the outer 
accessible surface of in- 
sulating parts ( this may 
be the outer surface of 
the luminaire if of insula- 
ting material ) 

Creepage 

Clearance 

iii) Parts which may become 
live due to the breakdown 
of functional insulation 
in luminaires of Class II 
and accessible metal 
parts 

iv) The outer surface of a 
flexible cord or cable and 
accessible metal to which 
it is secured by means of 
a cord grip, cable carrier 
or clip of insulating 
material 



Live parts of switches — 
mounted in luminaires 
and adjacent metal parts, 
after the removal of the 
insulating lining ( if any ) 
in the vicinity of the 
switch 

Live parts and other 
metal parts between 
them and the supporting 
surface ( ceiling, wall, 
table, etc ) or between 
live parts and the suppor- 



LtJMIN AIRES OV GLASSES 
AND I 



Luminaires or 
Class II 



25Q 

(Vj 

(3) 
3 



500* 
(V) 

4 



I 000* 
(V) 

(5) 
6 



24 

(V) 

(6) 
2 



250 

(V) 

(7) 
3 



500 

(8) 
4 



LuMl+ 

NAIRES 

OF > 

GtASS 

III 

(9) 
"2 



2 


4 


5 


6 


2 


8 


10 


2 


2 


3 


5 


6 


2 


8 


10 


2 



5 — 



5 — 



2 — — 






( Continued ) 



13 



IS s 10322 ( Part 4 ) - 1984 



TABLE 3 GREEPAGE DISTANCES AND CLEARANGES — Contd 

Creep AGE Distances and Liminaiees of Classes LrMiNAiBEs ob- Lumi- 

Glearances in Millimetres and I Class II naires 

Between t * s < ■"^- n of 

, — ^ . ^ 24 250 500* 1 COO* 24 250 500 Class 

Working voltage ( not (V) (V) (V) (V) (V) (V) (V) HI 
exceeding ) 

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) 

ting surface where there 
is no intervening metal: 

a) with no covering over 2 6 8 10 2 8 10 2 
the live part 

b) through sealing com- — 46 8 — 6 8 — 
pound with a thick- 
ness of not less than 

2*5 mm 

♦These values are working voltages and therefore they do not conflict with the 250 V 
limit for rated voltage of Glass luminaires. 

Note 1 — Internal creepage distances in permanently sealed components are 
not measured. Examples of permanently sealed components are components sealed- 
ofFor compound filled. 

Note 2 — The value in the table do not apply to components for which separate 
Indian Standards exist, but apply only to the mounting distances in the luminaire. 

Note 3 — In the case of starting transients up to 5 000 V peak, a 50 percent 
increase in the values given in the lable is applicable. 

Note 4 — Supply cables not supplied with the luminaire are not tested. 

5. MECHANICAL STRENGTH TEST 

5.1 The luminaires shall be tested for the adequate mechanical strength 
by the following method, 

5.2 Tests — Blows shall be applied to the sample by means of the spring- 
operated impact test apparatus shown in Fig. 4 or by other suitable means 
giving equivalent results. 

Note — Equivalent impact energies obtained by different methods do not 
necessarily give the same test result. 

5.2.1 The apparatus consists of three main parts, the body, the striking 
element and the spring-loaded release cone. 

5.2.2 The body comprises the housing, the striking element guide, the 
release mechanism and all parts rigidly fixed thereto. The mass of the 
assembly shall be I -25 kg. 

14 



IS 1 10322 ( Part 4 ) - 1984 



rRELEASE CONE 

rCONE SPRING 



rRELEASE BAR 



RELEASE MECHANISM 
SPRING 



RELEASE JAW 




COCKING I 



HAMMER SHAFT 



Fig. 4 Impact Test Apparatus 

5.2.3 The striking element comprises the hammer head, the hammer 
shaft and the cocking knob. The mass of this assembly shall be 0*25 kg. 

5.2.4 The hammer head shall have a hemispherical face of polyamidc 
having a rockwell hardness of R 100, with a radius of 10 mm; it shall be 
fixed to the hammer shaft in such a way that the distance from its tip to 
the plane of the front of the cone when the striking element is on the point 
of release, is equal to the value shown for the compression in Table 4. 

TABLE 4 IMPACT ENERGY AND SPRING COMPRESSION 

( Clauses 5.2.4 and 5.2.6 ) 
Part To Be Tested 



(1) 
Class II Luminaires 

Translucent covers forming^art_of the protectio n 

' againsl dUSt and iiior!rtur^7"5iIt not providing 

^T>r6feHio^n"TEgatllst^ectTie sKock - ™ ^ ^ .— 

Translucent covers providing protection against 
electric shock 



Impact 


CoWPKESSION' 


Energy 


( mm ) 


(Nm) 




(2) 


(3) 



0*35 



0-50 



0-70 



17 



20 



24 



Other parts 
Other Lumirtaires 

Translucent covers forming part of the protec- 

''Tion'agarnstdust anSTmoisIure, But not jprovi- 
dihg protection against electric shock, parts of 
ceramic material and parts of ceramic lamp- 
holders integral with the luminaire 

Translucent covers providing protection against 
electric shock and other parts, with the excep- 
tion of parts of ceramic material 

Note — Translucent covers, neither providing protection against electric shock 

nor forming part of the protection against dust and lae^&ture, are not subjected to 

the test. 



0-20 



0-35 



13 



17 



15 



IS:10322(Part4)-1984 

5.2.5 The cone shall have a mass of 0-06 kg and the cone spring shall 
be such th^t it exerts a forpe of 20 N when the release jaws are on the 
point of releasing the striking element. 

5.^.6 The hammer spring shall be such that the product of the com- 
pression ;xn millimetres and the force exerted in newtons, equals 1 000, the 
apmpres^ion being approximately 20 mm. The spring shall be adjustable 
so' as to c^use the hammer to strike with an impact energy and spring 
compression as shown in Table 4. 

' 5.2i7 Thd release mechanism springs shall be adjusted so that they exert 
just sufficient pressure to keep the release jaws in the engaged position. 

5.2.8 The apparatus is cocked by pulling the cocking knob back until 
(ihe. release jaWs engage with the groove in the hammer shaft. 

"'5.2.9 The blows shall be applied by pushing the release cone against 
the sample in a direction petpendicular to the surface at the point to be 
te$ted.; 

5.2.10 The pressure shall be slowly increased so that the cone moves 
back until it is in contact with the release bars, which then move to operate 
the release mechanism and allow the hammer to strike. 

5;2.11 The sample is mounted or supported as in normal use on a rigid 
wooden board, cable entries being left open, knockouts opened, and 
feover-fixing and similar screws lightened with a torque equal to two-thirds 
of that specified in Table 1 of Part 2 of this standard. 

5.2.12 Three blows shall be applied to the point which is likely to be 
the weakest, paying special attention to insulating material enclosing live 
part^ ;and to bushings of insulating material, if any. Additional samples 
may be necessary to find the weakest point; in case of doubt, the test shall 
be repeated on a fresh sample to which only three blows are applied. 

5.2.13 After the test, the sample shall show no damage, in particular: 

a) live parts shall not have become accessible; 

, b) the effectiveness of insulating linings and barriers shall not have 
been impaired; 

c) the sample shall continue to afford the degree of protection 
against ingress of dust and moisture, in accordance with its 
classification; and 

d) it shall be possible to remove and replace external covers without 
these covers or their insulating linings breaking. 

Breakage of an e»KiQSure is, however^, allowed if its removal does not 
impair safety. 



IS : 10322 ( Part 4 ) - 1984 

5.2.14 If a translucent cover of a Glass II luminaire that forms part of 
the protection against electric shock fails the impact energy test at 0*50 Nm, 
a further three samples shall be subjected to an impact energy test at 
0*50 Nm and two of these samples shall pass the second test. 

5.2.15 Damage to the finish, small dents which do not reduce crecpage 
distances or clearances below the value specified in 4, and small chips which 
do not adversely affect the protection against electric shock, dust or 
moisture, are neglected, 

6. ENDURANCE TEST AND THERMAL TEST 

6.1 Selection of Lamps and Ballasts 

6.1.1 Lamps used for the tests of this clause shall be selected in 
accordance with Appendix B. 

6.1.2 The lamps used in the endurance test are operated above their 
rated wattage for extended periods and should not be used for the thermal 
tests. However, it is usually convenient to retain in the thermal test for 
abnormal operation those lamps that have been used in the thermal test 
for normal operation. 

6.1.3 If the luminaire requires a separate ballast and this is not 
supplied with the luminaire, a ballast shall be selected for test purposes 
which is typical of normal production and which complies with the 
relevant ballast specification. The power delivered to a reference lamp 
by the ballast under reference conditions shall be within ± 3 percent of 
objective lamp power. 

Note — For reference conditions [ see IS : 1534 ( Part 1 )-1977* ]. 

6.2 Endurance Test 

6.2.0 Under conditions representing cyclic heating and cooling in 
service, the luminaire shall not become unsafe or fail prematurely. 
Compliance shall be checked by carrying out the test described in 6.2.1. 

6.2.1 Test 

a) The luminaire shall be mounted in a thermal enclosure with 
means for controlling the ambient temperature within the 
thermal enclosure. 

The luminaire shall be positioned on a similar supporting surface 
( and in the same operating position ) as for the normal 
operation thermal test ( see 6.3.1 ). 



♦Specification for ballasts for tubular fluorescent lamps: Part 1 For switch start 
circuits ( sfcond revision ). 

17 



IS I 10322 (?art 4)^ 19^4 

b) The ambient temperature within the enclosure shall be 
maintained within ± 2°G of ( ?a + 10 )°G during the test, tg, is 
25°G, unless otherwise marked on the luminaire. The initial 
heating period of the luminaire is included as part of the test 
duration. 

The ambient temperature within the enclosure shall be measured 
in accordance with Appendix C. Ballasts for operation separate 
from the luminaire shall be mounted in free air, not necessarily 
in the thermal enclosure, and shall be operated in an ambient 
temperature of 25 ± 5°G. 

c) The luminaire shall be tested in the enclosure for a total duration 
of 168 hours, made up of seven successive cycles of 24 hours. 

■ Supply voltage, as described in 6.2^1 (d) shall be applied to the 

luminaire during each cycle, except that the luminaire shall be 
^witched off for a continuous period of 3 hours at approximately 
the same point in each of the 24 hour-cycles. 

The circuit condition shall be as in normal operation for the first 
six cycles, and abnormal operation for the seventh cycle. 

For luminaires for which there is no abnormal condition, for 
example, fixed non-adjustable filament lamp luminaires, the total 
test duration shall be 240 hours ( that is 10 X 24 cycles at 
normal operation ). 

d) During operating periods, the supply voltage for filament lamp 
luminaires shall be 1-05 ± 0*015 times the voltage at which the 
rated wattage of the lamp is obtained and MO ± 0-015 tirnes 
rated voltage for tubular fluorescent and other discharge lamp 
luminaires. 

e) If the luminaire ceases to operate because of chance failure of a 
part of the luminaire ( including the lamp ), the instructions 
in 6.3.1 (g) shall apply. 

Arrangements should be made to signal a break in operation. The 
effective test duration shall not be reduced as a consequence of 
such a break. If a protective device in the luminaire ( for 
example, a thermal or current cut-out ) operates, the device shall 
be effectively short-circuited and the test shall be continued. 

6,2.2 Compliance ■ — After the test of 6.2.1, the luminaire shall be 
visually inspected. No part shall have become unserviceable ( other than 
as a chance failure as permitted in 6.2.1(e) and the luminaire shall not 
have become unsafe. The marking shall be legible. 

Symptoms of possible unsafe deterioration include cracks, scorches 
and deformation, ,;> 



IS : 10322 ( Part 4 )- 1984 

6.3 Therxnal Test ( Normal Operation ) — Under conditions represen- 
ting normal service, no part of the luminaire ( including the lamp ), the 
supply wiring within the luminaire, or the mounting surface shall attain a 
temperature which would impair safety. 

In addition, parts intended to be touched, handled, adjusted or 
gripped by hand while the luminaire is at operating temperature shall not 
be too hot for the purpose. 

Luminaires shall not caiise excessive heating of lighted objects. 

Compliance shall be checked by carrying out the test described 
in 6.3,1= 

6,3,X Test — Temperature shall be measured as indicated in 6.3.2 in 
accordance with the following conditions: 

a) The luminaire shall be tested on a mounting surface which is 
suspended in a draught-proof enclosure so designed to avoid 
excessive changes in ambient temperature. The mounting sur- 
face and an example of a draught-proof enclosure are given in 
Appendix D but other types of enclosure may be used if the 
results obtained are compatible with those that would be obtained 
by the use of the enclosure described in Appendix D [ For 
ballasts separate from the luminaire [ see 6.3.1 (h) ]. 

The luminaire shall be connected to the power supply with wiring 
and any materials ( for example, insulating sleeves ) supplied with 
the luminaire for the purpose. 

In general, connection shall be in accordance with the instruc- 
tions provided with the luminaire or marked on it. Otherwise, 
Vv'iring required to connect the luminaire under test to the supply 
and not supplied with it, should be of a type representative of 
common practice. Such wiring not supplied with the luminaire 
is thereafter referred to as the test piece. 

Temperature measurements shall be made in accordance with 
the Appendices G and E. 

b) The operating position shall be the thermally m^ost onerous 
operating position which may reasonably be adopted in service. 
For fixed non-adjustable luminaires a position shall not be selec- 
ted if it is stated to be not permissible in instructions supplied 
with or marked on, the luminaire. 

c) The ambient temperature within the draught-proof enclosure 
shall be within the range 10 to 30*'G and should preferably be 
25°G. It shall not vary by more than i 1°G during measure- 
ments and during a preceding period long enough to affect the 
results. 

19 



IS 1 10322 ( Part 4 ). 1984 

If, however, a lamp has temperature- sensitive electrical charac- 
teristics ( for example, a fluorescent lamp ), or if the ^a rating of 
the luminaire exceeds 30*G, the objective ambient temperature 
shall be within 5°G of the t^, rating, and should preferably be as 
the /ft rating. 

d) The test voltage for the luminaire shall be as follows: 

Filament lamp luminaires: That voltage which produces 1 "05 
times, the rated wattage of the test lamp ( see Appendix B ) 
except that heat test source ( H. T. S. ) lamps arc always 
operated at the voltage marked on the lamp. 

Tubular fluorescent and other discharge lamp luminaires: 
1-06 times the rated voltage. 

Exemption: 

For determination of the average winding temperature of a 
component with tyf marking, the test voltage shall be same as 
tlie rated circuit voltage. This exemption does not apply, for 
example, to measurement of a terminal block on the same 
component. 

Note — If a luminaire contains both a filament lamp and a tubular 
fluorescent or other discharge lamp, it may be necessary to provide it 
temporarily with two separate supplies. 

c) During and immediately before a measurement, the supply 
voltage shall be held within i 1 percent and preferably within 
:t 0-5 percent of the test voltage. The supply voltage shall be 
held within ± 1 percent of the test voltage during such preceding 
period as may affect the measurement; this period shall not be 
less than 10 minutes. 

f ) Measurements shall not be taken until the luminaire has stabi- 
lized thermally, that is, temperatures are changing at a rate less 
than 1°G per hour. 

g) If the luminaire ceases to operate because of a defective part of 
the luminaire ( including the lamp ) , the part should be replaced 
and the test continued. Measurements already made need not 
be repeated, but the luminaire shall be stabilized before further 
measurements are made. If, however, a hazardous condition 
has arisen, or if any part becomes unserviceable as a type defect, 
then the luminaire is deemed to have failed the test. If a pro- 
tective device in the luminaire ( for example, thermal or current 
cut-out of the one-shot or cycling types ) operates, the luminaire 
is deemed to have failed. 

20 



IS : 10322 { Part 4 ) - 1984 

h) Ballasts for operation separate from the luminaire shall be opera- 
ted in free air and shall be operated in an ambient temperature 
of 25 ± 5°G. If a separate ballast is supplied with the luminaire, 
temperatures of the ballast shall be measured and shall comply 
with the same limits as incorporated ballasts. If a separate 
ballast is not supplied with the luminaire, the temperatures of 
the test ballast shall not be measured. 

j ) In case of doubt in the test for filament lamp luminaires, the test 
shall be repeated with heat test source (H.T.S. ) lamps, if 
available. For temperatures which are mainly governed by the 
cap temperature of the lamp, the values obtained by H. T. S. 
lamps are decisive. For those temperatures which are mainly 
governed by radiation, the values obtained by normal produc- 
tion lamps with clear bulbs are decisive. 

k) The light beam from spotlights and similar luminaires is directed 
towards the matt black painted wooden vertical surface similar to 
that described in Appendix D. Luminaires are mounted at a 
distance from the surface which is marked on the luminaire. 

During the tests, measurements shall be made of the temperature 
of certain insulating parts as required in 7. 



TABLE 5 MAXIMUM TEMPERATURES UNDER THE TEST CONDITIONS 
FOR PRINCIPAL PARTS 

{Clause 6.3.2) 
Part Maximum Temperature ( °G ) 

Lamp caps: 

ES, BC types: junction with glass cemented 210* 

caps 

Mechanically locked ( lamp life > 3 000 h ) 250 

Mechanically locked ( lamp life > 3 000 h } 275 

Halogen types: pinch temperature Value under consideration 

Winding (ballast, transformer): 

If fw is marked /w 

If tvf is not marked ( paper interleaved ) 95 

If f w is not marked ( not separated by paper ) 85 

Starter canister: t 

( Continued ) 



21 



IS : 10322 ( Part 4 ) - 1984 



TABLE 5 MAXIMUM TEMPERATURE UNDER THE TEST CONDITIONS 
FOR PRINCIPAL PARTS — Contd 

Part Maximum Temperature ( °C ) 

Capacitor case: 

If /c is marked fc 

If tc is not marked 50 

Insulation of wiring [see Table 6 and 6.3.2(b) and 

6.3.2 (c) ] 

Insulating material { other than ceramic ) of 
lampholders: 

El4and B15 135 

E26, E27 and B22 165 

E39 and E40 225 
Switches marked with individual ratings: 

Without T marking 55 

With T marking T 

Other parts of the luminaire: 

( according to material and use ) [ see Table 6 and 6.3.2(b) ] 

Mounting surface: 

Normally flammable surface 90 

Non-combustible surface Not measured 

Parts intended to be handled or touched 
frequently^: 

Metal parts 70 

Non-metal parts 85 
Parts intended to be gripped by hand: 

Metal parts 60 

Non-metal parts 75 

Objects lighted by spotlights 90 

[ jffi 6.3.5( k ) ] (of the test surface ) 

♦For luminaires marked with information concerning the use of special lamps, or 
if it is obvious that special lamps are to be used, a higher value, as specified by the 
lamp manufacturer, is allowed. 

fValue under consideration. 

JNot applicable to parts intended only to be touched occasionally during adjust- 
ment, for example parts of spotlights. 

22 



IS : 10322 ( Part 4 ) - 1984 



TABLE 6 MAXIMUM TEMPERATURES UNDER THE TEST 
CONDITIONS FOR COMMON MATERIALS USED IN LUMINAIRES 

( Clause 6.3.2 ) 

Matebial Maximum Temperature (°C ) 

Insulation of wiring ( internal and external, 
supplied with luminaire): 

Glassfibre silicon-varnish impragnated 200* 

Polytertrafluoroethylene ( PTFE ) 250 

Silicone rubber ( not stressed ) 200 

Silicone rubber ( compressive stress only ) 170 

Ordinary polyvinyl chloride ( PVG) 90t 

Heat-resisting polyvinyl chloride ( PVG ) 105 

Ethylene vinyl acetate ( EVA ) ' 140 

Thermoplastics: 

Acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene ( ABS ) 95 

Cellulose acetate butyrate ( GAB ) 95 

Polymethyl methacrylate { acrylic ) 90 

Polystyrene 75 

Polypropylene 100 

Polycarbonate 130 

Polyvinyl chloride ( PVG ) ( where not used 100 
for electrical insulation ) 

Polyamide ( nylon ) 120 
Thermosetting plastics: 

Mineral-filled phenol-formaldehyde ( PF ) 165 

Cellulose-filled phenol-formaldehyde ( PF) 140 

Urea-formaldehyde ( UF ) 90 

Melamine 100 

Glassfibre-reinforced polyester ( GRP ) 130 

Other materials: 

Resin-bonded paper/fabric 125 

Silicone rubber ( where not used for electrical 230 
insulation ) 

Rubber where not used for electrical insulation 70 

♦Reduced by 15°C where insulation is stressed, for example, lamped or flexed, 

tCable specifications usually quote 70°G Max, for ordinary grade PVG. The value 
of 90°C is justified, however, because of the special conditions under which luminaires 
are tested for relatively short periods even for " normal operation ", for example, 
draught-proof enclosure and test supply voltage above the rated value for the luminaire. 

23 



IS : 10322 ( Part 4 )- 1984 

6.3.2 Compliance — In the test of 6.3.1 none of the temperatures shall 
exceed the appropriate values given in Tables 5 and 6 ( subject only to 
the concession of 6.3.2(a), when the luminaire is operated at its rated 
ambient temperature t^. 

In those cases where the temperature in the test enclosure differs 
from ifaj this difference shall be taken into account when applying the limits 
in the tables [ see also 6,3.1 (c) ]. 

a) The temperatures shall not exceed the values shown in Tables 5 
and 6 by more than 10°G. If the temperature of any part exceeds 
the value shown in tables by lO^G or less, the test shall be repea- 
ted, the luminaire measuring devices, including thermocouples, 
being dismantled and reassembled before retesting. 

Then, the temperature of the mounting surface shall not exceed 
the value shown in the table and the temperature of any other 
part shall not exceed the value shown in the table by more than 
5°G. 

Note — The allowance of ICG and repetition of the test with an 
allowance of 5°G are made to take into account the inevitable variability of 
temperature measurements in luminaires. 

b) The temperature of any part of the luminaire liable to thermal 
degradation in service shall not exceed a value which corresponds 
to a reasonable service period for the particular type of luminaire. 
Generally agreed values for principal parts of luminaires are 
given in Table 5 and values for common materials, when used in 
luminaires, are listed in Table 6. These values are prescribed 
here to obtain uniform assessment; slightly different values may 
be quoted elsewhere on the basis of other forms of materials 
testing or for other applications. 

If materials used are claimed to withstand higher temperatures 
than those shown in Table 6, or if other materials are used, they 
shall not be exposed to temperatures in excess of those which 
have been proved permissible for these materials. 

c) The temperature of the test piece {see 6.3.1(a)] of PVG 
insulated shall not exceed 90° G ( or 75°G where it is stressed, for 
example, clamped ) or such higher temperatures as may be indi- 
cated on the luminaire or in the manufacturer's instructions 
supplied with the luminaire in accordance with the requirements 
in 6 of Part 2 of this standard. The limit shall be 120"'C for a 
wire in a heat-resisting sleeve supplied with the luminaire. 

6.4 Thermal Test ( Abnormal Operation ) — Under conditions 
representing abnormal service conditions ( where applicable; but not 

24 



IS: 10322 ( Part 4 ). 19«4 

representing a defect in the iuminaire or misuse ), no part of the luminaire, 
the supply wiring within the luminaire or the mounting surface, shall 
become unsafe. 

Gomphance shall be checked by carrying out the test described 
in 6.4.1. 

6.4,1 Test — Temperatures of parts listed in Table 7 shall be measured 
in accordance with the following conditions; 

a) The test shall be made if, during service, the luminaire could be 
in an abnormal condition as in cases (i), (ii) or (iii) below, and 
if this condition would cause any part to be at a higher tempera- 
ture than during normal operation ( for which a preliminary 
trial may be needed ) . 

If more than one abnormal condition is possible, that condition 
shall be selected which most adversely affects the results of the 
tests. 

The test is not applicable to fixed non-adjustable filament lamp 
luminaires except in case of (iii) below: 

i) A possibly unsafe operating position arising other than from 
misuse; for example, if by accident an adjustable luminaire is 
bent close to the supporting surface. 

ii) A possibly unsafe circuit condition arising other than from 
defective manufacture or misuse; for example, a circuit condi- 
tion occurring at the end of the service period of a lamp of a 
starter ( see Appendix F ) . 

iii) A possibly unsafe operation condition arising from the use of a 
GLS lamp in a filament lamp luminaire intended for a special 
lamp; if, temporarily, a special lamp is replaced by a GLS 
lamp of the same wattage. 

Test (ii) is applicable only to tubular fluorescent and other 
discharge lamp luminaires. 

The luminaire shall be tested under the conditions specified in 
(a), (c), (e), (f; and (h) of 6.3.1. In addition the following 
shall apply: 

b) The test voltage shall be a.9 follows: 

Filament lamp luminaires — as specified in 6.3.1(d). Tubular 
fluorescent and other discharge lamp luminaires — I'lO times the 
rated voltage. 

Note — If a luminaire contains both a filament lamp and a tubular 
fluorescent or other discharge lamp, it may be necessary to provide it 
temporarily with two separate supplies. 

c) If the luminaire ceases to operate because of a defective part of 
the luminaire (including the lamp), the part should be replaced 

25 



ISM0322 ( Pa|-t4)-1984 

and the test continued. Measurements already made need not 
; be repeated but the luminaire shall be stabilized before further 

measurements are made. If, however, a hazardous condition has 
I arisen, or if any part becomes unserviceable as a type defect, then 

the luminaire is deemed to have failed the test. 

If a protective device in the luminaire (for example, a thermal 
or current cut-out of the one-shot or cycling types ) operates 
during the test, the highest temperature reached should be taken 
as the final temperatures. 

d) If the luminaire incorporates a capacitor ( other than a capaci- 
V r tor connected directly across the supply ), the capacitor shall be 
short-circuited, notwithstanding the requirements of Appendix F 
if the voltage across it under test conditions would exceed 1-25 
times its rated voltage for self-healing capacitors or 1-3, times its 
rated voltage for non-self-healing capacitors. 

> 6.4^2 Compliance — -In the test of 6.4.1, none of the temperatures shall 
Exceed the appropriate value as given in Table 7 [ subject only to the 
concession of 6.4.2(a) ], when the luminaire is operated at its rated tem- 
perature /a- ^^ those cases where the temperature of the test enclosure 
differs from tg,, the difference shall be taken into account when applying 
the limits in the table. 

a) The temperatures shall not exceed the values shown in Table 7 by 
more than lO'^G. If the temperature of any part exceeds the 
value shown in Table 7 by 10°G or less, the test shall be 
repeated, the luminaire measuring devices, including thermo- 
couples, being dismantled and reassembled before retesting. 
Then, the temperature of the mounting surface shall not exceed 
the value shown in Table 7 and the temperature of any other 
part shall not exceed the value shown in Table 7 by more than 
5°G. 

6.5 Thermal Test ( Failed Ballast or Transformer Conditions ) 

These tests apply only to luminaires marked with the ^7 symbol 

and incorporating ballasts and transformers which, during failure of the 
winding or windings, may cause overheating of the mounting surface. These 

tests do not apply where the ^^ symbol requirements are met by 

spacing the ballasts and transformers from the mounting surface in accord- 
ance with the requirements of 16.2.1 and 16.2.2 of Part 2 of this standard. 
These requirements and tests are based on the assumption that 
^during failure of the ballast or transformer, for example, owing to short- 

26 



tS: 10322 (f»art 4 ) -19^4 

circuited windings or a short-circuit to the case, the ballast or transformer 
winding will not exceed 350°G for a duration of more than 15 miniitcs 
and, therefore, the temperature of the mounting surface will not exceed 
180°G for a duration of more than 15 minutes. 

TABLE 7 MAXIMUM TEMPERATURES UNDER THE TE ST CONDITIONS 

( Clause 6.4.2 ) 
Part Maximum Temperatube ( ''G ) 

Winding ( ballast, transformer ): 

If /w is not marked 170* 
If tyi is marked: 

fw 90 170 

95 177 

100 185 

105 193 

J 10 200 

115 . ' 208 

120 216 

125 223 

130 230 
Capacitor case: 

If tc is not marked 60 
If ^c is marked ^c+10 
Mounting surface: 

Normally fiammable surface ( filament lamp 175 

luminaires )t . 

Normally flammable surface ( luminaires 130 
^Tj? symbol ) 

Non-combustible surface ( luminaires Not measured 

without S^ symbol) ' 

♦Applies to paper interlayered windings and those not separated by paper, 
t Excluding luminaires incorporating transformers. 

' ■ ~ ' ~ ~ 

6.5.1 Test for Luminaires Without Thermal Cut-outs — The iuminaire shall 
be tested under the conditions specified in (a), (c), (e), (f) and (h) of 
6.3.1. In addition, the following also apply: 

20 percent of the lamp circuits in the Iuminaire, and not Jess than 
one lamp circuit, shall be subjected to abnormal conditions ( see 
Appendix F ). 

The circuits which have the most thermal influence on the mounting 
surface shall be chosen and other lamp circuits shall be operated at rated 
voltage under normal conditions. 

The circuits subjected to abnormal conditions shall be operated at 
0*9, 1*0 and I'l times rated the voltage. When conditions are stable at 

27 



t& t 10322 ( Part 4 ). 1984 



each of these three test voltages, the highest winding temperature and 
highest temperature of any part of the mounting surface shall be 
measured. 

6.5.1.1 Compliance — After the test of 6.5.1: 

a) The temperature of the mounting surface shall not exceed ISO^G 
when the lamp circuits subjected to abnormal conditions, is ( are ) 
operated at 1 • 1 times the rated voltage. 



cc 

< 

a: 

UJ 



UJ 

u 

< 
u. 
a: 

z> 
(/) 

o 

z 
=) 
o 

2 



160 



150 



130 



100 



60 



i. 




/'" 




• 
• 








y 

A 


y 
• 




^ 





r~-{2) 


^^ L(7) 


.--" 






'"^ 






^(8) 

















60 100 



200 



300 



350 



400 



WINDING TEMPERATURE (^C) 



Explanation of points on the graph 

Limiting value of mounting surface temperature in case of failed 
winding. 

Limiting value of mounting surface temperatures during abnormal opera- 
tion at ri times rated voltage \^see 6.5.1.1(a) ]. 

rO and ri times rated voltage respectively 



(1) 
(2) 
(3)1 



\a. ! Measuring points at 0*9, 
W| [,,e6.5.1,l(b)]. 



(6) Straight line drawn through three m* asuring points and indicating a 
satisfactory luminaire as the extrapolation of the line to a winding 
temperature of 35°C is belovv a mounting surface temperature of 180°C. 

(7) Straight line drawn through three measuring points and indicating a 
luminaire which fails the test because the extrapolation of the line 
exceeds a mounting surface temperature of 180°G before reaching a 
winding temperature of 350°G. 

(8) Assumed Maximum value of the winding temperature of a failed 
winding. 

Fig. 5 Graph as Per Clause 6.5.1.1 
28 



IS : 10322 ( Part 4 ). 1984 

b) The values of the temperatures measured at 0*9, 1*0 and I'l times 
the rated voltage are plotted on a graph ( See Fig. 5 ) and the best 
straight line is drawn through these points. The extrapolation 
of this straight line shall not reach a point representing a mount- 
ing surface temperature of 180°G at a ballast or transforrne- 
winding temperature of less than SSO^G. 

6i5.2 Test for Luminaires with Thermal Cut-outs External to the Ballastor 
Transformer — The luminaire shall be set up for this test as described 
in 6.5.1. 

The circuits subjected to abnormal conditions shall be operated Mfith 
slowly and steadily increasing current through the windings until the 
thermal cut-out operates. Time intervals and increments in current shall 
be such that thermal cquilib)?ium between winding temperatures and 
mounting surface temperature^ is achieved as far as is practicable. During 
the test, the highest^ temperature of any part of the surface on which the 
luminaire is mounted &halllDe continuously measured. This completes the 
test for luminaires fitted with thermal links. 

For luminaire fitted with manual-reset thermal cut-outs, the test shall 
be repeated six times allowing a 30 minutes interval between tests. At the 
end of each 30 minutes interval, the cut-out shall be reset. 

For luminaires fitted with auto-reset thermal cut-outs, the test shall 
be continued until a stable mounting surface temperature is achieved. 

6.5.2.1 Compliance — The highest temperature of any part of the 
mounting surface shall not exceed 1 80*^0 at any time during tests for 
thermal links and manual-reset thermal cut-outs, or 1 30*G during test for 
auto-reset thermal cut-outs. 

7. RESISTANCE TO HEAT, FIRE AND TRACKING 

7.1 Resistance to Heat — External part of insulating material providing 
protection against electric shock, arid retaining live parts in position shall 
be sufficiently resistant to heat. 

7*1.1 Test — Compliance shall be checked by the following test: [ 

The test is not made on parts of ceramic material or on the insulating 
of wiring. 

The test shall be made in a heating cabinet having a temperature 
of 25 i 5°G in excess of the operating temperature of the relevant part 
determined during the temperature test ( normal operation ) of 6 with a 
minimum temperature of 125°G when parts retaining live parts in position 
are tested. 

29 



IS ; 10322 ( Part 4 ) - 1984 

The surface of the part to be tested shall be placed in the horizontal 
position and a steel ball of 5 mm diameter pressed against this surface with 
a force of 20 N. A suitable apparatus for this test is shown in Fig. 6. If 
the surface under test bends, the part where the ball presses should be 
supported. 




SPHeRICAL 

^ -TEST SAMPLE 

Fig. 6 Ball-pressure Apparatus 

After 1 hour the ball shall be removed from the sample and the 
sample shall be cooled by immersion in cold water for 10 s. The diameter 
of the impression shall be measured and shall not exceed 2 mm. 

7.2 Resistance to Flame and Ignition 

7.2.0 Parts of insulating material retaining live parts in position and 
external parts of insulating material providing protection against electric 
shock shall be resistant to flame and ignition. 

7.2.1 Parts of insulating material retaining live parts in position shall 
withstand the following tests: 

The parts to be tested are subjected for 10 s to a butane gas flame 
( at least 95 percent purity ) 12 ± 2 mm long from a burner consisting of 
a tube having a bore of 0-5 ± 0*1 mm. The test is conducted in still air 
and at least half the flame shall be applied to the sample. 

Any self-sustaining flame shall extinguish within 30 s of removal of 
the gas flame and any burning drop from the sample shall not ignite a 
piece of cotton gauze, consisting of five layers, spread out horizontally 
500 mm below the test sample. 

The requirements of this clause do not apply in those cases where 
the luminaire provides an efTective barrier to burning drops. 

7.2.2 Parts of insulating material which do not retain live parts in 
position but which provide protection against electric shock, shall with- 
stand the following tests: 

Parts are subjected to a test using an electrically heated conical 

mandrel in an apparatus shown in Fig. 7. 

30 



IS: 10322 (Part 4). 1984 



TERMINALS FOR / 
THERMOCOUPLES 




i^'^ 



0«.2 



TERMINALS FOR THERMOCOUPLE 




Fig. 7 Hot Mandrel Apparatus 
31 



IS : 1Q322 ( Part 4 ) - 1984 

The mandrel is inserted into a conical hole reamed in the part 

to be tested in such a way that portions of the conical part of the 

; m.andrel of equal lengths protrude from both sides. The sample is 

pressed against the mandrel with a force of 12 N. The means by 

which the force is applied is then locked to prevent any further 

movement. The mandrel is heated to 300°C in approximately 

i , 3 minutes and this temperature is maintained within ±10°G for 

I: 2 minutes and is measured by means of a thermo-couple inside the 

f mandrel. During the test, sparks of about 6 mm in length are 

produced at the upper surface of the sample where the mandrel 

protrudes, by means of a high-frequency spark generator. 

; Neither the sample nor any gas produced xiuring the heating 

: shall be ignited by the sparks. 

The spark generator shall produce only sufficient energy for 
this purpose. It shall not ignite an unheated sample. 

The test is not made on parts of ceramic material. 

7.12.3 Parts of insulating material which are not included in 7.2.1 or 
7.2,2, for example, covers, shades or the like, shall: 

a) withstand the 300° G hot mandrel test of 7.2.2. 

b) comply with the spacing requirements of appropriate clause in 
Part 2 of this standard. 

7.3 Resistance to Tracking — Insulating parts of luminaires other than 
ordinary luminaires, which retain live parts in position or are in contact 
with such parts, shall be of material resistant to tracking unless they are 
protected against dust and moisture. 

7.3.1 Test — Compliance shall be checked by the following test which 
shall be made at three places on the test sample: 

The test should not be made on parts of ceramic material. 

A flat surface of the part to be tested, if possible at least 
15 X 15 mm with a thickness corresponding to that of the material 
used in the luminaire, shall be placed in a horizontal position. Two 
electrodes of platinum of the dimensions shown in Fig. 8, shall be placed 
on a surface of the sample in a manner shown, so that the rounded edges 
are in contact with the sample over their whole lengths. 

The force exerted on the surface by each electrode shall be about 
1 N. The electrodes shall be connected to a 50 Hz supply source having 
a voltage of 1 75 V of substantially sine-wave form. The total impedance 

32 



IS : 10322 ( Part 4 ) - 1984 




ELECTRODE 
SAMPLE 



in 

O 
t— 

O 


r 






1 






5too ^ 








^ 








Fig. 8 



SLIGHTLY ROUNDED 
EDGE 
All dimensions in millimetres. 
Arrangement and Dimensions of the Electrodes 
FOR the Tracking Test 



of the circuit when the electrodes arc short-circuited shall be adjusted by 
means of a variable resistor so that the current is 1 -0 ± 0* 1 A with 
cos ^ = 0-9 to 1. An overcurrent relay, with a tripping time of at least 
0-5 s, shall be included in the circuit. 

The surface of the sample shall be wetted by allowing drops of a 
solution of ammonium chloride in distilled water to fall centrally between 
the electrodes. The solution shall have a volume resistivity of 400 Q cm 
at 25°G, corresponding to a concentration of about 0*1 percent. The 
drops shall have a volume between 20 and 25 mm^ and fall from a height 
of 30 to 40 mm. The time interval between one drop and the next shall 
be 30 ± 5 s. 



33 



IS 110322 ( Part 4 )- 1984 

7.3.1.1 No flashover or breakdown between electrodes shall occur 
before a total of 50 drops has fallen. In case of doubt, the test shall be 
repeated, if necessary, on a new sample. Care should be taken that the 
electrodes are clean, correctly shaped and positioned before each test is 
started. 

8. RESISTANCE TO CORROSION 

8.1 Ferrous parts of drip-proof, rain-proof, splash-proof, jet-proof, water- 
tight and pressure water-tight luminaires, the resulting of which might cause 
the luminaire to become unsafe, shall be adequately protected against 
ruting. Luminaires shall be checked for resistance to corrosion by the 
following tests: 

All grease is removed from the parts to be tested, by immersion in 
carbon tetrachloride for 10 minutes. The parts are then immersed 
for 10 minutes in a 10 percent solution of ammonium chloride in 
water at a temperature of 20 ± 5°G. Without drying, but after 
shaking off any drops, the parts are placed for 10 minutes in a box 
containing air saturated with moisture at a temperature of 20 ± ^^C. 
After the parts have been dried for 10 minutes in a heating cabinet 
at a temperature of 100 ± 5*'G, their surface shall show no signs of 
rust. 

Traces of rust on sharp edges and any yellowish film removable 
by rubbing are ignored. 

For small helical springs and the like, and for inaccessible parts 
exposed to abrasion, a layer of grease may provide sufficient protec- 
tion against rusting. Such parts are subjected to the test only if 
there is doubt about the effectiveness of the grease film, and the test 
is then made without previous removal of the grease. 

8.1.1 Contacts and other parts made of rolled copper of copper alloy 
sheet, the failure of which might cause the luminaire to become unsafe, 
shall be free from season cracking. 

Compliance shall be checked by inspection and for luminaires other 
than ordinary, by the test given in 8.5. 

The test given in 8.5 is made only in case of doubt. 

8.1i2 Parts of aluminium or aluminium alloy in drip-proof, rain-proof, 
splash-proof, jet-proof, water-tight and pressure water-tight luminaires, shall 
be resistant to corrosion, if otherwise the luminaire might become unsafe. 

8.2 Mercurous Nitrate Test for Copper and Copper Alloys 

This describes the technique for conducting the mercurous nitrate 
test of wrought copper and copper alloy products. It is an accelerated test 

34 



IS t 10322 ( Part 4 ) - 1984 

for the purpose of detecting the presence of residual ( internal ) stresses that 
might bring about failure of the material in service or storage through 
stress corrosion cracking. 

While this method has also been used for testing assemblies and 
partial assemblies, the method is not intended for that purpose, and some 
modification may be required for such use. 

8.2.1 AiercuTGUS Nitrate Solution — The solution is an aqueous mercurous 
nitrate solution containing 10 g of HgNOg and 10 ml of HNOa ( density 
1 *40 to 1 •42g/cm3 ) per litre of solution. 

This aqueous mercurous nitrate solution is to be prepared by either 
of the following procedures A or B: 

Procedure A : Dissolve 11*4 g of HgNOg, SHgO or 10-7 g of HgNOg, 
KgO in approximately 40 ml of distilled water, acidified with 10 ml of 
HNOg. After the crystals are completely dissolved, dilute the solution 
with distilled water to 1 000 ml. 

Procedure B : Dissolve 76 g of mercury in 114 mi of diluted KNOg 
( one part water to one part HNO3 ) . Carefully dilute with distilled 
water to 1 000 ml. This provides a concentration of 100 g of HgNOs per 
litre and an excess of 30 ml of HNOr after a slight loss due to heating. 
Add the water in small portions while stirring to prevent local overdilu- 
lion. This gradual dilution, together with the excess acid, will prevent 
precipitation of basic salts of mercury. Dilute 100 ml of this solution 
( 10 percent ) with 7 ml of HNO3 and 893 ml of water. 

A solution of which the concentration is not in accordance with that 
specified should not be used. 

The mercurous nitrate crystals are obtainable in both the mono- 
hydrate and dihydrate form and should be bandied with caution because 
of their highly toxic effects. When weighing crystals, the weight of water 
of crystallization should be taken into consideration. The mercurous 
nitrate crystals are photosensitive and when they have turned yellow are 
diflficult to dissolve. 

If heating is used in either of these procedures for preparing the 
mercurous nitrate solution, care should be exercised to avoid loss of 
HNO3. 

8.2.1.1 Test piece — The test is made on test pieces taken from the 
luminaire. 

8.2.1.2 Procedure — The test piece should be first degreased. Totally 
immerse the test piece in an aqueous solution of sulphuric acid ( 15 per- 
cent by volume ) or in an aqueous solution of 60 percent water and 40 per- 

35 



IS : 10322 ( Part 4 ) - 1984 

cent concentrated HNOg for a period not exceeding 30 seconds, to remove 
all traces of carbonaceous matter and oxide films. Remove the test piece 
from the pickling solution and wash it immediately in running water. Then 
drain the test piece free of excess water and totally immerse it in the 
mercurous nitrate solution with at least 1 5 ml of mercurous nitrate solution 
per square centimetre of exposed surface of the test piece. 

After 30 minutes, remove the test piece from the mercurous nitrate 
solution and wash it in running water. Wipe off any excess mercury from 
the surface of the test piece. The test piece is allowed to dry. 

The test piece shall show no crack visible to the naked eye 24 hours 
after washing. 

In cases of doubt regarding the presence of cracks, volatilize ( with 
caution ) the mercury on the surface of the test piece by the application of 
heat on a hot-plate or in an oven. Then examine the specimen for cracks 
under suitable magnifying equipment at a magnification of 10 to 18 
diameters. 

CAUTION — Equipment for the detection and removal of mercury 
vapour produced in volatilization should be used. The use of rubber 
gloves is adviseable. 



APPENDIX A 

( Clause 3.2.6 ) 

TEST TO ESTABLISH WHETHER A CONDUCTIVE PART 
IS A LIVE PART WHICH MAY CAUSE AN ELECTRIC 

SHOCK 

A-1. In order to determine whether a conductive part is a live part which 
may cause an electric shock, the luminaire is operated at rated supply- 
voltage and nominal frequency and the following tests conducted: 

a) The current flowing between the part concerned and earth is 
measured, the measuring circuit having a non-inductive resis- 
tance of 2 000 Q. The part concerned is a live part if a current 
of more than 0-7 mA ( peak ) is measured. 

b) The voltage between the part concerned and any accessible part 
is measured, the measuring circuit having a non-inductive resis- 
tance of 50 000 Q. The part concerned is a live part if a voltage 
of more than 34 V ( peak ) is measured. 

A-2. For the above tests, one pole of the test supply shall be at earth 
potential. 

36 



IS : 10322 ( Part 4 ) - I9i4 

APPENDIX B 

(Clause 6.1.1) 

TEST LAMPS 

B-1. For the tests of 6, it is convenient to keep a stock of lamps of types 
commonly required. These should be carefully selected from normal 
production lamps for characteristics as close as possible to the objective 
characteristics listed in the appropriate standards. The selected lamps 
should be aged ( at least 24 hours for filament lamps and at least 100 h for 
tubular fluorescent and other discharge lamps, with occasional oflf-periods ), 
and a further check should be made that their characteristics are still 
satisfactory and stable. Lamps should not be retained as test lamps for 
longer than about three-quarters of their typical operating period in 
normal service. Lamps should be inspected before each test for any 
damage or signs of approaching unserviceability. Discharge lamps should 
be checked regularly to ensure that there has been no appreciable shift in 
electrical characteristics which influence the temperatures in luminaires. 
If a lamp can be inserted in a circuit in more than one position — for 
example a fluorescent lamp — marks should be made to assist consistent 
insertion. Great care should be taken in handling test lamps; in particu- 
lar, sodium and mercury-halide discharge lamps and amalgam fluorescent 
lamps should not be moved while still hot. 

B-2. A lamp selected for a particular test shall be of a rating and type for 
which the luminaire is claimed to be suitable. If a choice of lamp shape, 
construction or finish is indicated by the manufacturer, the thermally most 
onerous shall be taken. Otherwise, the most common type shall be used. 

B-3, The following requirements refer to the selection of lamps as test 
lamps, and to lamp selection for particular test of a luminaire. 

B-3.1 Filament lamps 

B-3.1.1 For types in common use, a selection should be made of lamps 
with cap temperature measured under the conditions described in IS : 8913- 
1978* above the average for production lamps and preferably from the 
high-temperature end of the production spread. ( This requirement does 
not apply to lamps for use only in the endurance test. ) 

B-3. 1.2 If the luminaire is provided with a marking for special lamps, 
if it is obvious that special lamps are to be used in the luminaire, the test 
is made with such special lamps. In all other cases, the luminaire is 
fitted with general lighting service ( GLS ) lamps. 

♦Standard method of measurement of lamp cap temperature rise. 

37 



IS : 10322 ( Part 4 ) - 1984 

B-3.1.3 Lamps are chosen in accordance with the rated wattage of the 
luminaire, but when the luminaire has E 27 or B 22 lampholders, a GLS 
lamp with a rated wattage of not less than 60 W shall be used and if the 
luminaire has E14 or B15 lampholders a GLS lamp with a rated wattage 
of not less than 40 W shall be used. 

B-3.1.4 This requirement does not apply, however, if it is obvious that 
the luminaire should not be used with such lamps. 

B-34I.5 The voltage rating of a test lamp shall by typical of the voltage 
rating of filament lamps in the market for which the luminaire is intended. 
If the luminaire is intended for two or more different groups of voltage 
supplies. For example, for 200 — 250 V and for 100—125 V, then the 
test lamp shall be the one suited to the lowest voltage range ( that is the 
one with the highest current ) . 

B-3.1.6 If a lamp is operated in conjunction with a component ( for 
example, a transformer with 24 V output ) inside the luminaire, the voltage 
rating of the test lamp shall be in accordance with the marking of the 
component or similar instructions. 

B-3.2 Tubular Fluorescent and Other Discharge Lamps 

B-3.2.1 When a lamp is operated under reference conditions ( accor- 
ding to the IS standard ), the lamp voltage, current and power shall be as 
close as possible to the ISI objective values, and shall be within 2"5 per 
cent of these values. 

B-3.3 If a reference ballast is not available, lamps may be selected using 
a production ballast, which at the calibration current, has an impedance 
within ±1 percent of that of the reference ballast. The characteristics 
of preheated electrodes shall be as close as possible to the objective values* 

Note 1 — A discharge lamp, incorporating a series filament, is described as a 
filament lamp for the purpose of clause 6. If the luminaire is for use with filament 
lamps or discharge lamps incorporating series filament, it should be tested with the 
more onerous ( or if not known, with each in turn ). 

Note 2 — If the luminaire is for use with a combination of lamp type? ( for 
example, a filament lamp plus a discharge lamp ), it should be tested with the 
thermally most onerous combination. 

If the luminaire is for use with either filament or discharge lamps, it should be 
tested with the more onerous ( or, if not known, with each in turn ). 

It is usually found that translucent materials attain a higher temperature with 
a discharge lamp or a discharge lamp incorporating a series filament than with a 
filament lamp, for a given lamp power. 

Note 3 — If the luminaire is designed for a lamp type for which specifications 
have not yet been established, a test lamp should be selected after consultation with 
the lamp manufacturer, 

38 



IS : 103:^2 ( l>art 4 ) - 1984 

APPENDIX C 

( Clause e.2,l an^ 6.3.1) 

TEMPERATURE MEASUREMENT 

C-1; The following recommendations refer to methods of making 
temperature measurements on luminaires in a draught-proof enclosure in 
accordance with 6.3.5. These methods of measurement have been 
evolved as particularly suitable for luminaires; alternative methods may be 
used if it is established that they are of at least equal precision and 
accuracy. 

C-2. Temperatures of solid materials are usually measured by means of 
thermocouples. The output voltage is ready by a high-impedance device 
such as a potentiometer. With a direct-reading instrument it is important 
to check that its input impedance is suited to the impedance of the 
thermocouple. Temperature-indicators of the chemical type are at present 
suitable only for rough checks of measurements. 

C-3. The thermocouple wires should be of low thermal conductivity. A 
suitable thermocouple consists of 80/20 nickel-chromium paired with 40/60 
nickel-copper ( or with 40/60 nickel-aluminium ) . Each of the two wires 
( usually of strip form, or circular in section ) is fine enough to pass 
through a 0*3 mm hole. All the end-portions of the wires liable to be 
exposed to radiation have a high-reflectance metal finish. The insulation 
of each wire is of suitable temperature and voltage rating; it is also thin 
but robust. 

C-4. Thermocouples are attached to the measuring point with minimum 
disturbance of thermal conditions and with low-resistance thermal contact. 
If a particular point on a part is not specified, the point of highest 
temperature should be found by preliminary exploration ( for this purpose, 
a thermocouple may be mounted in a holder made of material of low 
thermal conductance; instruments using thermistors are also convenient ) . 
It is important to explore materials such as glass, since temperature may 
vary rapidly with position. Thermocouples mounted within or near a 
luminaire should have minimum exposure to conducted or radiant heat. 
Care should also be taken to avoid voltage from current carrying parts. 

C-5. The following methods have been found useful for attaching thermo- 
couple junctions at measuring points: 

a) Mechanical clamping, for example, under fixing device ( clamp- 
ing under current carrying parts is deprecated ). 

b) Soldering to a metal surface ( with a minimum account of 
solder ) . 

39 



i$ : 1031^2 ( ]l^art 4 ) - 1984 

c) By an adhesive ( minimum amount required ). The adhesive 

( should not separate the thermocouple from the measuring point. 
An adhesive used , with a translucent material should be as 
translucent as possible. A suitable adhesive for use with glass is 
formed of one part of sodium silicate to two parts of calcium 
sulphate with water medium. On non-metal parts the last 
20 mm of the thermocouple is attached to the surface to offset 
the flow of heat from the measuring point. 

d) Gables. The insulation is slit and the thermocouple inserted 
( without touching a conductor ); the insulation is then bound 
up. 

e) Mounting surface ( see Appendix D ). A thermocouple is attach- 
ed to a copper disc ( approximately 5 mm diameter, 1 mm thick- 
ness, and with a matt black finish ) , sunk level with the surface 
at the hottest point. 

C-6. The average ambient temperature in the draught-proof enclosure is 
taken to be the air temperature at a position near one of the perforated 
walls on a level with the centre of the luminaire. The temperature is 
usually measured by a mercury-in-glass thermometer. An alternative 
sensor is a thermocouple or thermistor attached to a small metal vane 
shielded against radiation. 

C»7. The average temperature throughout a winding is measured by the 
change-in-resistanee method. The procedure to be followed is described 
in Appendix E. 

Note — It is found that errors are often made in the estimated calculation; an 
independent rough check should be made by measuring the case temperature of the 
component and adding a winding-to-case differential appropriate to the construction. 

C-8. It is important that all temperature measuring instruments should 
be checked regularly. It is also recommended that measuring authorities 
should interchange luminaires to improve consistency in the measurement 
of different materials at different temperature levels. 



APPENDIX D 

( Clause 6.3.1 ) 

DRAUGHT-PROOF ENCLOSURE 

D-1. The following recommendations refer to the construction and use of 
a suitable draught-proof enclosure for luminaires, as required for 
the tests of normal and abnormal operation. Alternative constructions 

40 



IS t 10322 ( Part 4 ) - 19ft4 



for draught-proof enclosures are suitable if it is established that similar 
results are obtained. 

The draught-proof enclosure is rectangular, with a double skin on 
top and on at least three sides, and with a solid base. The double skins 
are of perforated metal, spaced apart approximately 150 mm, with regular 
perforations of 1 to 2 mm diameter, occupying about 40 percent of the 
whole area of each skin. 

The internal surfaces are painted with a matt paint. The three 
principal internal dirriensions are each at least 900 mm. There should hp 
a clearance of at least 200 mm between the internal surfaces and any part 
of the largest luminaire for which the enclosure is designed. Alternative 
constructions for draught-proof enclosures are suitable if it is established 
that similar test results are obtained. 

Note — If it is required to test two or more luminaires in a large enclosure, 
care should be taken that radiation from one luminaire cannot affect any other. 

There is a clearance of at least 300 mm above the top of the 
enclosure and around the perforated sides. The enclosure is at a location 
protected as far as possible from draughts and sudden changes in air 
temperature; it is also protected from sources of radiant heat. 

A luminaire under test is positioned as far away as possible "Om the 
six internal surfaces of the enclosure. The luminaire is mounted ( subject 
to the requirements of 6.3.1 and 6.4.1 ) as under service conditions. 

A luminaire for direct fixing to a ceiling or wall should be fixed to a 
mounting surface comprising a wood or wood-fibre board. A non-combusti- 
ble insulating material should be used if the luminaire is not suitable for 
mounting on a^ combustible surface. The board is approximately 15 mm 
thick, and extends not less than 100 mm ( but preferably not more than 
200 mm ) beyond the normal projection of the smoothed outline of the 
luminaire. There is a clearance of at least 100 mm between the board 
and the internal surfaces of the enclosure. The board is painted black 
with a matt non-metallic paint. 

A luminaire for corner-fixing should be fixed in a corner comprising 
two boards each complying with the preceeding requirements. 

A third board is required if the luminaire is to be fixed in a vertical 
corner immediately below a simulated ceiling. 

Recessed luminaires are mounted in a test recess, consisting of a 
suspended ceiling, on top of which is a rectangular box with vertical sides 
and horizontal top. . . . ■ . 

41 



18 : 10322 ( Part 4 ) - 1984 

The suspended ceiling is made of a 1 2 mm thick porous wood fibre 
board, in which a suitable opening has been made for the luminaire. The 
wood fibre board reaches at least 100 mm outside the projection of the 
luminaire on this board. The vertical sides of the box are made of 19 mm 
thick laminated wood. During the test, these sides are placed at a 
distance of 50 mm or 75 mm from the luminaire, where it is mounted in 
the suspended ceiling. The top of the box is placed at a distance of 
approximately 25 mm from the substantially flat top surface of the 
luminaire, and is made of a 12 mm thick porous wood fibre board which 
is tightly sealed to the sides of the box. If there are spacers or connecting 
boxes on top of the luminaire which project more than 25 mm above its 
top surface, these spacers or connecting boxes should be placed in direct 
contact with the top of the test box. 

The suspended ceiling and the interior of the box are painted black 
with a matt non-metallic paint and there is a gap of not less than 100 mm 
between this assembly and the inside walls, ceiling and floor of the test 
enclosure. 

When luminaire is intended to be recessed into a wall, the test is 
made using a test recess similar to that described above, but with the board 
placed vertically. 



APPENDIX E 

( Clause 6.3.1 ) 

DETERMINATION OF WINDING TEMPERATURE RISES 
BY THE INCREASE IN RESISTANCE METHOD 

Note — Reference to ballasts also applies to similar components such as 
transformers, 

E-1, Before commencing the test, arrangements are made by which the 
ballast may be quickly connected by appropriate means of negligible resis- 
tance to a Wheatstone bridge, or other suitable resistance measuring 
instrument, after the luminaire has been disconnected from the supply. 

E-2. A chronometer with an easily-read second hand is essential. 
E-3, The test procedure is as follows. 

E-3il The luminaire remains unenergized for a period long enough to 
ensure that the complete luminaire, including the ballast windings is ther- 

42 



tS : 10322 (Part 4 ).ld84 

mally stable in a substantially constant ambient temperature (^i ), which 
should not change by more than 3°G during this period. 

E-3.2 The resistance {Ri) of the cold ballast winding is measured and ^i 
noted. The luminaire is operated until thermal stability has been achie- 
ved as indicated by a suitable temperature measuring device attached to 
the body of the ballast. The ambient air temperature ( /g ) in the draught- 
proof enclosure is noted. 

£-3.3 The luminaire is then disconnected from the supply, the time noted, 
and the ballast connected immediately to the Wheatsone bridge. The 
resistance is measured as quickly as possible and the corresponding time 
noted. 

£-3.4 Further resistance measurements, if necessary, are made at suitable 
intervals whilst the ballast is cooling, the times at which the measurements 
are made being recorded. These measurements enable a time/resistance 
curve to be plotted which is extrapolated back to the point corresponding 
to the instant of disconnection of the supply and the resistance R^ of the 
hot winding is read. 

Since the resistance of copper, over the range of temperatures of 
ballasts, varied in direct proportion to the temperature as measured from 
a reference point of "-234'5°G, the hot temperature f^ may be calculated 
from the ratio of the hot resistance R^ to the cold Ri by means of the 
equation: 

R^ _ /g + 234-5 
^1 "" ^1 -f 234-5 

Hence, for windings of copper wire: 

^8 = ^ ( ^1 4- 234-5 ) - 234-5 

The temperature rise is the difference between the calculated tempe- 
rature fg and the ambient air temperature t^ at the conclusion of the test, 
that is: 

temperature rise = ( /g — /g )*'G 



43 



IS : 10322 ( Fart 4 ) - I9d4 

APPENDIX F 

( Clause 6.4 ) 

ABNORMAL CIRCUIT CONDITIONS 

F-1. The following is a list of abnormal circuit conditions which may be 
applicable to a tubular fluorescent or other discharge lamp luminaire and 
fr-om which the thermally most onerous condition shall be taken 
( see 6.3.1 ). If the luminaire contains more than one lamp, the abnormal 
condition shall be applied only to the one lamp which leads to the most 
adverse results. The abnormal condition shall be set up before the test is 
started. Conditions (d) and (e) refer only to lamps with two preheated 
electrodes ( for example, fluorescent lamps ). The descriptions include 
instructions on test arrangements. Conveniently the abnormal circuit condi- 
tion may be produced or simulated by remote switching so that it is not 
necessary to disturb a luminaire which has just completed the test of 
normal operation. 

a) Short-circuit of starter contacts — This condition applies to starters 
with moving contacts, including starters incorported in lamps. 

h) Lamp rectification — This is a fault condition which may occur 
after extended use in luminaires employing starterless ballasts, 
with capacitive reactance control. Luminaires employmg this 
type of circuit shall be tested in accordance with the requirements 
of relevant Indian Standard on tubular fluorescent lamps and the 
circuit arrangements for this test shall be as specified in that 
standard. 

c) Lamps removed and not replaced. 

d) One electrode of lamp open-circuit — ThQ condition may be pro- 
duced by switching. ( Alternatively, a test lamp may be suitably 
modified. ) The electrode shall be selected which more adversely 
affects the results. 

e) Lamp will not start but both electrodes intact. For this condition, 
a non-serviceable or modified test lamp may be used. 



44 



