**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



^^Eti^^tt^n i im^VN^ ^^Ts^^ii ra^%^uiKa a «&^^ 



IS 1599 (2012) : Metallic Materials 
Mechanical Testing of Metals] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



Bend Test [MTD 3: 



&&&i f /n^sb^s^ rs^arn^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR TJ^ ^TT teMHI | ^t ^Wt ^m\ ^f ^TT ^T^?TT \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS: 1599 -1985 

( Superseding IS : 1692-1974, IS : 3260-1965 
and IS : 4598-1968 ) 

( Reaffirmed 2006 ) 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR BEND TEST 

(Second Revision) 



Third Reprint FEBRUARY 1997 



UDC 669:620.163.24 



© Copyright 1986 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Gr3 January 19*6 



IS 1 1599 - 1985 

( SaperMdtac IS 1 1692-1974, B 1 9260-1965 
«ndISt459S-196C) 



Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR BEND TEST 

( Second Revision ) 



Methods of Physical Tests Sectional Committee, SMDC 3 

Chairman Representing 

Shri P. K. Chaxravarty The Tata Iron & Steel Co Ltd, Jamshedpur 

Members 

Shri R. K. Abrol Bharat Steel Tubes Ltd, Ganaur ( Haryana ) 

Shri S. Bonde ( Attentat* ) 
Shri Sujit Kumar Basu M. N. Dastur & Co ( P ) Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri S. Sen Gupta ( Alternatt ) 
Shri K. K. Bhatia Quality Marking Centre, Ainritsar 

Shri R. N. Biswas Steel Authority of India Ltd ( Durgapur Steel 

Plant ), Durgapur 

Shri T. S. Tewari ( Alternate ) 
Dr A. Chakraborty Usha Martin Industries Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri H, Makes wary ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. K. Cherian Indian Aluminium Co Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri Pakkaj De ( Alternate ) 
Dr R. F. Dakbai. Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri V. V. Prabhu ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. K. Das Gupta National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi 

Shri K. G. Garg Directorate General of Technical Development 

and Production ( Air ), New Delhi 

Shri P. Raghothama Rao ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. G. Gehaki Blue Star Limited, Bombay 

Shri G. S. Sobti ( Alternate ) y 

Shki A. Ghosh National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri D. S. Majumdar ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. A. Haque The Tata Iron and Steel Co Ltd, Jamshedpur 

Shri A. S. Waoa ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. C. Hore Ministry of Railways 

Shri S. R. De ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. V. Kulkarmi Fuel Instruments & Engineers Pvt Ltd, Ichalkaranji 

Shri J. V, Kulkarni ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. Kumar Mining & Allied Machinery Corporation Ltd, 

Durgapur 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



©Copyright 1986 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act 



IS * 15M - 1985 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri K. S. Lakshm£narayaN Avery India Ltd, Calcutta 

§hbi R. D. Sharka ( Alternate ) 
Shbi C. B. Lttnawat The Indian Tube Co Ltd, Jamshedpur 

Shbi R. Rama Rao ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. R. Mazuhdar Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shbi A. K. Chakbobobty ( Alternate ) 
Shbi V. N. Nanda Associated Instrument Manufacturers' ( India ) Pvt 

Ltd, New Delhi 
Shbi S. C. Jain ( Alternate ) 
Shbi R. A. Pad* anabhan Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute 

( CSIR ), Durgapur 
Shbi M. Prasad Steel Authority of India Ltd ( Rourkela Steel 

Plant ), Rourkela 
Shbi N. Gofalakbishna ( Alternate ) 
Shbi S. Radhakrishnan National Aeronautical Laboratory ( CSIR ), 

Bangalore 
Db V. Sbixivasan ( Alternate ) 
Db V. Rao National Metallurgical Laboratory ( CSIR ), 

Jamshedpur 
Db D. J. Chakbavabti ( Alternate ) 
Shbi R. N. Saha Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, 

New Delhi 
Shbi S* K. Pandey ( Alternate ) 
ShriD. N. Sarkab Ministry of Defence ( Ordnance Factories Board ), 

Calcutta 
Shbi A. R. Bash ( Alternate ) 
Shbi F. C. Sharma Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi 

Shri K. SwamiappaK Ministry of Defence ( R&D ) 

Shbi H. K. Tanbja Indian Register of Shipping, Bombay 

Shri S. Kumar ( Alternate ) 
Shri Yadhvib Singh Steel Authority of India Ltd ( Bokaro Steel Plant), 

Bokaro 
Shri P. N. Tripathy ( Alternate ) 
Shbi K. Raghavendrak, Director General, ISI ( Ex-qfficio Member ) 

Director ( Stuc & Met ) 

Secretary 

Shri JagmohaY Singh 
Deputy Director ( Metals ), ISI 



IS : 1599 - 1985 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR BEND TEST 

( Second Revision ) 

0. FOREWORD 

0,1 This Indian Standard ( Second Revision ) was adopted by the Indian 
Standards Institution on 28 February 1985, after the draft finalized by 
the Methods of Physical Tests Sectional Committee had been approved 
by the Structural and Metals Division Council. 

0.2 This standard was first published in 1960 and was revised in 1974. 
While reviewing this standard in the light of the work done by ISO/TC 
164 'Mechanical Testing of Metals' at the international level, the Sectio- 
nal Committee responsible for this standard decided to revise this 
standard so as to have a single Indian Standard on Method for bend 
test amalgamating three other Indian Standards on the subject. 

0.2.1 This standard thus supersedes the following Indian Standards: 

IS : 1692-1974 Method for simple bend testing of steel sheet and 
strip less than 3 mm thick 

IS : 3260-1965 Method for bend test for copper and copper alloys 

IS: 4598-1968 Method for single bend test for aluminium and 
aluminium alloy sheet and strip of thickness 
between 0*2 mm and 7 mm 

0.3 This standard is based on the International Standard ISO 7438-1985 
'Metallic materials — Bend test' issued by the International Organization 
for Standardization. 

0.4 In reporting the results of test or analysis made in accordance with 
this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded 
off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. 



♦Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revistd ). 

3 



IS 1 1599 - 1985 

1. SCOPE 

1*1 This standard specifies the method of conducting bend test for 
determining the ability of metallic materials to undergo plastic defor- 
mation in bending. It applies to the bend test of test pieces taken from 
metallic products as specified in the relevant product standard. 

1.2 This standard is not applicable to certain materials and/or products, 
for example tubes in full section or welded joints, for which other 
standards exist. 

2. PRINCIPLE 

2*1 The bend test consists of submitting a test piece of round, square, 
rectangular, or polygonal cross section to plastic deformation by bending, 
without changing the direction of loading, until a specified angle of bend 
is reached. 

2.2 The axes af the two legs of the test piece remain in a plane 
perpendicular to the axis of bending. In the case of 180* bend, the two 
lateral surfaces may, depending on the requirements of the material, 
standard, lie flat against each other or maybe parallel at a specified 
distance, an insert being used to control this distance. 

3. SYMBOLS AND DESIGNATIONS 

3.1 Symbols and designations used in the bend test are shown in Fig. I 
and 2 and specified in Table 1. 

TABLE 1 SYMBOLS AND DESIGNATIONS 

Symbols Designation Unit 



a 
( as shown in 
Figures ) 


Thickness or diameter of test piece { or 
diameter of the inscribed circle for 
pieces of polygonal cross-section ) 


mm 


b 


Width of test piece 


mm 


L 


Length of test pice 


mm 


I 


Distance between supports 


mm 


D 


Diameter of mandrel 


mm 


a 


Angle of bend 


degree 


f 


Internal radius of bend portion of test 
piece after bending 


mm 



IS : 1599 - 1985 

4. TEST EQUIPMENT 

4.1 The bend test lhall be carried out in testing machines or presses 
equipped with the following devices: 

a) Bending device with two supports and a mandrel as shown in 
Fig. 1, 

b) Bending device with a V-block and a mandrel as shown in 
Fig. 2, and 

c) Bending device with a clamp as shown in Fig- 3. 





Fio. 1 Simple Bend Test 
5 



IS : 1599 - 1985 




Fig. 2 Bend Test by the Use of V-Block 




Fig. 3 Bend Test Through an Angle Over a Specified Radius' 
4.2 Bending Device with Supports and a Mandrel 

4.2.1 The length of the supports and the width of the mandrel shall 
be greater than the width or diameter of the test piece. The diameter 
of the mandrel is determined by the material standard. The test piece 
supports shall be rounded to a radius between 1 and 10 times the thick- 
ness of the test piece and shall be sufficiently hard ( see Fig. 1 ). 



tS: 1599*1985 

4.2.2 Unless otherwise specified, the distance between the supports / 
shall be taken as approximately: 

/ = D + 3 a 

and shall not change during the bend test. 

4.3 Bending Device with a V-Block 

4.3.1 The tapered surfaces of the V-block shall form an angle of 
180° - a ( see Fig. 2 ). 

4.3.2 The edges of the V-block shall be rounded to a radius between 1 
and 10 times the thickness of the test piece and shall be sufficiently hard. 

4.4 Bending Device with a Clamp — Thejievice consists of a clamp 
and a mandrel of sufficient hardness; it may be equipped with a lever 
for applying force to the test piece ( see Fig. 3 ). 

5. TEST PIECE 

5.1 Round, square, rectangular or polygonal cross section test pieces are 
used in the test. Any areas of the material affected by shearing or flame 
cutting and similar operations during $he catting, of test pieces shall be 
removed. However, testing a test piece, the affected, parts of which 
have not been removed, is acceptable provided the resultant bend is 
satisfactory. 

5.2 The edges of rectangular test pieces shall be rounded to a radius 
not exceeding one-tenth of the thickness of test pieces. The rounding 
shall be made in such a way that no transverse, burrs, scratches or maris 
are formed which might adversely affect the test result. However, testing 
a test piece, the edges of which have not been rounded, is acceptable 
provided the resultant bend is satisfactory. 

5.3 Unless otherwise specified in the relevant standard, the width of the 
test piece shall be as follows: 

a) The same, when the width of the product is equal to or less than 

20 mm; and 

b) When the width of a product is more than 20 mm: 

i) 20 ± 5 mm for products of thickness less than 3 mm, and 
ii) Between 20 and 50 mm for products of thickness equal to or 
greater than 3 mm. 

5.4 Thickness of the Test Piece 

5*4.1 The thickness of the test piece from sheets, strips and sections 
shall be equal to the thickness of the product to be tested. If the thick- 
ness of the product is greater than 25 mm, it may be reduced by 
machining one surface to not less than 25 mm. During bending, the 
unmachined side shall be the tension-side surface of the test piece. 

7 



IS: 15*9-1985 

5.4JC The round or polygonal cross section test piece shall be submitted 
to the bend test in the cross section equal to that of the product. In case 
the diameter ( for a round cross section ) or the inscribed circle diameter 
(for polygonal cross section) does not exceed 50 mm. When the 
diameter or the inscribed circle diameter, of the test piece exceed 30 mm 
up to and including 50 mm, it may be reduced to not less than 25 mm. 
When the diameter or the inscribed circle diameter, of the test piece 
exceeds 50 mm, it shall be reduced to not less than 25 mm ( see Fig. 4 ). 
During bending, the urmachined side shall be the tension-side surface 
of the test piece* 




Fig. 4 Position of Bend Test Piece in Round or 
Polygonal Sections 



5w5 In the case of forgings, castings and semifinished products, the 
dimensions of the test piece and sampling shall be as specified in the 
relevant standard or by agreement. 

5.6 By agreement but not in cases of dispute, test pieces of a greater 
thickness and width than those specified in 5.3 and 5.4 may be subjected 
to the bend test. 

5.7 The length of a test piece depends on the thickness of the test piece 
and the test equipment used. 

6. PROCEDURE 

6.1 In general, the test is carried out at ambient temperature between 10 
and 35°C. Tests carried out under controlled conditions shall be made 
at a temperature of 23 ± 5°C. 

6 J2 The bend test is carried out using one of the following methods 
specified in the relevant standard: 

a) That a specified angle of bend is achieved under the force and 
for the given conditions ( see Fig. 1, 2 and 3 ); 

b) That the legs of the test piece are parallel to each other at a 
specified distance apart while under the force ( see Fig. 6 ); and 

c) That the legs of the piece are in direct contact while under the 
force ( see Fig. 7 ). 

8 



IS : 1599 - 1985 

6.3 In the bend test to a specified angle of bend, lay the test piece on 
the supports ( see Fig. 1 ) or on the V-block ( see Fig. 2 ) and bend it in 
the middle between the supports by the action of a continuously increas- 
ing force. Apply the bending force slowly so as to permit free plastic 
flow of the material. 

6.3.1 If it is not possible to bend the test piece to the specified angle in 
the manner described in 6.3, complete the bend by pressing directly on 
the ends of the legs of the test piece ( see Fig. 5 ). 




Fig. 5 Bend Test Through a Specified Angle 



6.4 In the bend test to parallelism of the legs, the test piece may be bent 
first, as indicated in 6.3 and then placed between the parallel plates of 
the press ( see Fig. 6 ) where it is further formed by application of a conti- 
nuously increasing force to obtain parallelism of the legs. The test may 
be carried out with or without the insert. The thickness of the insert 
shall be defined in the relevant standards or by agreement. 

An alternate method of test is that of bending over a mandrel 

(;m4.4). 

6.5 If specified, the test piece, after its preliminary bending, is further 
bent between the parallel plates of the press, by application of a conti- 
nuously increasing force, to obtain direct contact between the legs of 
the test piece ( see Fig. 7 ). 



18:1599-1985 





Fio. 6 Bend Test Through an Angle of 180° Over a Specified} Radiuj 




Fig. 7 Bend Test to Flat Condition 



7. INTERPRETATION OF RESULTS 

7*1 The interpretation of the bend test is carried out according to the 
requirements of the material standards. When these requirements are 
not specified, absence of cracks visible without the use of magnifying 
aids is considered as the evidence that the test piece withstood the bend 
test. 

7«2 The angle of bend, specified in material standards, is always 
considered as a minimum. If the internal radius of a bend is specified, 
it is considered as a maximum. 



10 



IS : 1599 - 1985 

8. TEST REPORTS 

8.1 The test report shall include the following information: 

a) Reference to this standard; 

b) Identification of the test piece ( type of the material, cast 
number, direction of the test piece axis relative to a product, 
etc ); 

c) Shape and dimensions of the test piece; 

d) Test method; and 

e) Test result. 



11 



