**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 3451-2 (1975) : Code of practice for care and maintenance 
of brushes. Part 2 - Brushes other than pan set brushes 
[CHD 24: Brushware] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



rS;34SI (Part II)- 1975 
( Reaffirmed 2003 ) 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 
CARE AND MA INTO NANCE OF BRUSHES 

PART II BRUSHES OTHER THAN PAN-SET BRUSHES 



UDC 6a7-9 




© Coppight 1975 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MAMAK fiHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 



ppj^oQrO'Z^ 



Diiemb^T 1975 



IS: 3451 (Part II) -1975 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 
CARE AND MAINTENANCE OF BRUSHES 

PART II BRUSHES OTHER THAN PAN-SET BRUSHES 

Brush ware Sectional Committee^ CDC 31 

Chairman Representing 

SiDJi Sr^RTiASK Ranjan Roy Prima Brushware, Calcutta 

Mtmbers 

SiiRi K. C. AriAK'vVAr Association of State Road Transport Undertakings, 

New Delhi 
Da P. K. Bhandari Indian Paints Association, Calcutta 

Chiomist & METAi.i/iiPvnisT=II, Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) 
ROSO, LucKXow 

Works Manaokk ( Finish- 
! N<; } , C & W Shopr, Eastern 
Railway, Lti.t^ah ( Alternate) 
SifjN Dhaham BiR Army Brush Factory, Delhi 

Sniu SiRi Ram ( Alternate) 
Shhi C. B. Garware Garware Synthetic Bristles Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Smri B. M.Jejurikar (Alternate) 
SuRi V: H. Kanchan Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Shri Kkwal K. Malhotra Kewalraj & Go Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shrj D. D. Mehra Brush ware Ltd, Kanpur 

Shrt E. Levigne (Alternate) 
SuRi S. P. MiTLLiCK National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri P. K. Pyne ( Alternate ) 
SuHi N[rmal Singu Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shri K. H. Ga.^dhi ( Alternate ) 
SmtiS.S.Prni Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, 

New Delhi 
Siuii N. K. MrTftATJDHARA Rao Directorate of Marketing & Inspection, Nagpur 

Shki S. Jayaraman ( Alternate ) 
Shri Bhooilat. Shah Brushwell & Co, Calcutta 

Shri Jaichand Mehta (Alternate) 
Shri G. G. Sutaone Development Commissioner, Small Scale Industries, 

New Delhi 

Shri S. C. Pandev ( Alternate ) 
Dr G. M. Saxena, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 



Director ' Chem ) 



Secretary 

Shri P. S. Aroba 

Assistant Director { Chem ), ISI 



© Copyright 1975 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS: 3451 (Part II) -1975 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 
CARE AND MAINTENANCE OF BRUSHES 

PART II BRUSHES OTHER THAN PAN-SET BRUSHES 
0. FORE WO R D 

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part II ) was adopted by the Indian 
Standards Institution on 15 September 1975, after the draft finalized by 
the Brushware Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical 
Division Council. 

0,2 The durability and the standard of performance of a brush greatly 
depend upon the care and maintenance of the same, both by the 
manufacturer and the consumer. \"ery often it is foinid that impiDper 
Iiandling and careless storing of brushes lead not only to uneconomical 
use but also to unsatisfactory performance. Thus the formulation of a 
standard code of practice for care and maintenance has been thought 
of for helping the manufacturers as well as consumers of the brushes. 
Care and maintenance for pan-set brushes has already been dealt in 
Part I. This standard ( Part II ) covers the care and maintenance of 
bruslies other than pan-set brushes. 

0.3 Care and maintenance of brushes differ, depending on their 
composition, construction and uses. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard ( Part II ) lays down the practice to be followed in the 
care and maintenance of brushes other than pan set, that is, either 
stapled set, or wire drawn set or twisted-in-wire set. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.1 For the purpose of this standard, definitions of terms given in 
IS : 5060-1969* shall apply. 

3. CLASSIFICATION 

3.1 The brushes may be classified into two groups depending on: (a) the 
filling materials used, and (b) the end use. 

*Glossary of terms used in bnishware industry. 



IS: 3451 (Part II) -1975 

3.1.1 The following shall be the classification of brushes on the basis of 
filling material used: 

Group A Made of animal hair, namely, bristle, catte-tail hair, etc. 

Group B Made of vegetable fibre, namely, coco fibres. Palmyra 
fibre, Manila fibre, etc. 

Group C Admixture of animal hair and vegetable fibre in different 
proportions. 

Group D Synthetic fibre, namely, nylon monofilament. 

Group E Made of metallic wire, namely, steel wire, brass wire, 

etc. 

3.1.2 The following shall be the classification of brushes on the basis of 

end use: 

(Classification I — Brushes used for hygienic purposes, namely, tooth 
brush, hair brush, etc. 

(Classijicaiion 2 — Brushes used for sanitation and cleaning purposes, 
namely, push sweeping brushes, banister brushes, 
carriage washing brushes, etc. 

4. CARE AND MAINTENANCE BEFORE USE 

4.1 Damage Due to Insect or Micro-Organisms to Brushes 
Belonging to Groups A, B and C 

4.1.1 Insect Damage — New and unused brushes belonging to Groups A 
and C, which are made with animal hair either entirely or partially 
as filling materials, are more susceptible to attack of beetles, moths, etc, 
which directly eat the filling materials and thus damage the brush as a 
whole gradually. Other insects like pig lice and horse lice also do 
similar damage. 

4.1.2 Damage Due to Bacteria and Moulds — Certain forms of bacteria and 
moulds, such as mildew attack, causes the filling materials discolouration 
and rotting. Fungi attack is very common to the filling materials of 
vegetable origin, when kept in moist atmosphere. 

4.1.3 To prevent insect attack, all costly brushes of Groups A, B 
and C excepting tooth brushes should be wrapped with tissue paper or 
polythene sheets and kept in a closed container together with naphthalene 
flakes or balls. The brushes may also be dusted with DDT powder. 
Tooth brush should be hygienically packed individually in paper board 
or plastics container. 



ISj3451 (Part II) -1975 

4.1.4 The tip ends of animal hair are the most vulnerable points 
of attack. Soft hair brushes are susceptible to such attack. Brushes of 
Groups A and C should, therefore, be flitted periodically to dislodge the 
eggs if laid down in the interval, after exposing to sun for a while. 

4.2 Sterilization — Brushes of Groups Al and Bl should be sterilized 
thoroughly by washing the same in a hot disinfecting solution of 1 percent 
antiseptic solution or in hot water before use. This process should 
be continued periodically during the whole span of utilization. 

4-3 Prevention from Dust and Polluted Atmosphere — Brushes 
belonging to Groups Al and Dl and clothes brushes of any group should 
be kept in dust-proof packet to protect against polluted atmosphere. 

4.4 Damage Due to Corrosion 

4.4.1 Brushes belonging to Group Eand brushes of other groups, which 
are twisted in wire generally get damaged by corrosion of the m.etallic 
portion especially when the metal is ferrous. 

4.4.2 To protect from, this type of dam.age, the m.etallic portion of the 
brush — whether filling materials or twisted wires — should be covered 
with a thin coat of drying oil and should then be stored in dry place ( if 
possible, having been wrapped in oil paper or tar paper ). 

5. CARE OF BRUSHES DURING USE 

5.1 Choice of Brush 

5.1.0 Care in the selection of brush for a particular purpose is 
necessary for economic performance, 

5.1.1 A brush of correct size and type should be selected depending 
on the nature of work. For instance, clothes brush should be used for 
dusting off clothing and hair brush for dressing hair and not vice versa. 
Similarly, nail cleaning brush should be used for cleaning nails only. 
Again in case of tooth brush, adult size should be used by adults and 
junior size by juniors. The requisite size and quality of tooth brush 
should be determined depending on the nature of the teeth and the 
condition of the gums. This holds good for all groups and types of 
brushes. 

5.2 Correct Use — All types of brushes belonging to Groups A, B, C 
and D should be used with light pressure. A few examples citing the 
proper use of common types of brushes are given in 5.2.1 to 5.2.9. 

5.2.1 Tooth Brush — The brush with paste should be applied slowiy on 
the teeth in circular movement, with mild pressure, to clean the teeth. 
Unusual pressure will not only bring deform.ity in the filling materials 
earlier, but may harm the gums and teeth. 

NoTBJ — Care should be taken not to use deformed and worn out brush. A brush 
once \ised by one should not be used by others. 



IS:3451 (Part II) -1975 

5.2.2 Nail Cleaning Brush — This brush should be used slowly with 
straight to-and-fro motion with mild pressure to clean the nails specially 
their tips. Unusual pressure may cause harmful effect on the finger 
tips. 

5.2.3 Hair Brush — This is required for dressing hair, simultaneously 
cleaning foreign matter from them and massaging the head. With a 
straight stroke and mild pressure the brush should be driven through the 
hair just over the headj otherwise the skin may get damaged. In this 
case also the brush used by one should not be used by others. 

5,2*4 Clothes Brush — This brush is used for dusting off or dry 
cleaning of clothing mainly. Sometimes it is used in conjunction with 
some sort of cleaning solution. In all types of functions, straight stroke 
with mild pressure is advisable. Deep and hard stroke may spoil the 
texture of the cloth cleaned. 

5.2.5 Carriage Washing Brush — This brush is required for the removal 
of dirt and undesirable marks from painted surfaces of the carriage body 
acrumulated daring service by some sort of cleaning solution, generally 
sohible ill water, 

5.2.5.1 A circular movement with mild pressure throughout the 
process of washing including the application of cleaning solution is 
advisable. A heavy pressure will cause deformity and unusual wearing 
of the filling materials^ at the same time it may leave undesirable scratch 
inaiks on the surface cleaned. 

5.2.6 Banister Brush ~~Th\s> brush is used for dry sweeping. This should 
})e applied in straight stroke with light pressure. Heavy pressure may 
impart scratch marks, and deformity in the shape of filling material may 
develop earlier. 

5.2.7 Shoe Blacking and Shoe Polishing Brushes — Both the brushes are 
filled in with cattle tail hair or coarse bristles. The first one is required 
for the application of shoe cream or shoe polish on the leather surface 
of mainly shoes, while the second one is required for glazing 
the same. In the first case a circular stroke will give better effect while 
in the second ca«e straight stroke will give better effect. In both the cases, 
however, mild pressure should be advocated, as heavy pressure will only 
cause deformity and unusual wearing of the filling materials. 

5.2.8 Brushes with Metallic Filling Material — These types of brushes are 
(generally required for dislodging/removing foreign materials from hard 
metallic surfaces. In these cases also, the brushes are required to rub 
down against the surface with moderate pressure and in some cases 
circular stroke gives better results. Heavy pressure will only spoil the 
shape of the i)rush either by unusual wearing or by deformation of filling 
materials. 



IS: 3451 (Part II) -1975 

5.2.9 Boiler Tube Brush — This brush is made of steel wire set in by 
twisted wire. The size of the brush should be selected just to suit 
the tube. A size slightly bigger than the inner diameter of the tube 
is preferable. Too big a size will spoil both the brush and the tube and 
a smaller size will fail to serve the purpose. 

5.2.9.1 After use, this brush should be washed thoroughly with 
kerosene and stored in dry place in the vertical position so that the filling 
material does not get any deformity, 

6. CARE AND MAINTENANCE AFTER USE 
6.1 Cleaning 

6.1.1 All types of brushes belonging to Groups A, B, Cand D should be 
cleaned thoroughly by flitting in case the brushes are used dry, and by 
washing with clean water when they are used wet in conjunction with 
cleaning solution soluble in water. It should then be dried preferably 
by hot blast of dry air and stored in a clean dry place. 

6.1.2 In case of tooth brush, nail brush, clothing brush, hair brush, etc, 
they should be kept in a dust-proof packet after thoroughly cleaning and 
drying. 

6.1.3 In case of shoe blacking and shoe polishing brushes, frequent 
washing is not necessary, but they should be kept in dust-proof packet. 
Occasionally, these brushes may be required to be cleaned by kerosene, 
then by soap solution ( preferably non-causticised one ), finally by thorough 
rinsing in water, dried and kept in dust-proof packet. 

6.1.4 Typewriter brushes should be cleaned every time after use in 
petrol and kept in dust-proof packet when dried. 

6.1.5 Metallic brushes ( Group E ) specially of ferrous type should 
never be washed in water. In case cleaning is necessary, kerosene should 
\)e used as cleaning medium. But after such cleaning the Inrush should 
])e dipped into a non-drying oil bath, soluble in kerosene, to guard 
ao-ainst corrosion, after which they should be wrapped in oil paper 
or tar paper and stored in dry place. This film of non-drying oil shoidd, 
however, be washed before use on the next occasion. 

6.1.6 De-rusting — In case the filling material or the twisted wire 
of iron, as the case may be, in brushes belonging to Group E has already 
started corroding, it is advisable to de-rust the affected portion by 
dipping into a solution containing prcferabh' de-rusting cum phosphating 
agent. After this, the brush should be treated with a coat of varnish or 
boiled linseed oil by dipping it in a bath containing varnish or oil as 
the case naay he, for protecting against further corrosion. 



IS:3451 (Part II) -1975 

6.2 Treatment to Wooden Handles — The wooden handles of 
brushes, which are used frequently in conjunction with water or some 
cleaning solution that affect the wooden handles, should occasionally be 
painted or varnished or at least treated with a coat of boiled linseed oil 
in order to protect them from rotting. 

7. RECONDITIONING 

7.1 When deformity of filling materials of brushes belonging to 
(iroups A, B, G or D has developed due to long or improper use, or due 
to wrong process of storing, they may be reconditioned by trimming the 
obstinate filling materials, to the extent necessary, in case the same could 
not be brought to proper shape by any mechanical means. 

7.2 In case this deformity takes place in metallic brushes of Group E, in 
the form of spreading out of filling materials, the same may be set right 
by straightening^ them through some mechanical device. 



INDIAN STANDARDS 

ON 

BRUSHWARE 

IS: 

384-1971 Brushes, paints and varnishes, fiat ( third revision ) 

486-1973 Brushes, sash tooJ, for paints and varnishes ( second revision ) 

487-1966 Brushes, paints and varnish (i) oval, ferrule bound, and (ii) round, copper 
wire bound { revised ) 

1 103-1971 Brushes, artists' ( second revision ) 

1104-1968 Brushes, lettering {first revision ) 

1843-1963 Nylon monofilaments 

1844-1962 Bristles 

2616-1963 Brush, (i) cleaning tank, and (ii) commode and lavatory 

2621-1964 Brush, commode chutes 

2622-1964 Brush, banister ( hand-sweeping ), single 

2701-1964 Brush, carriage washing ( without hnndle ) 

3008-1964 Brush, shoe blacking 

3009-1971 Brushes, shoe polishing 

3015-1964 Brush, scrubbing 

3387-1973 Toothbrush {first revision ) 

3451 ( Part I ) -1966 Code of practice for care and maintenance of brushes: Pari I 
Pan-set brushes 

3451 (?artll)-1975 Code of practice for care and maintenance of brushes: Part II 
Brushes other than pan-set brushes 

4208-1967 Brush, stencil 

4214-1967 Brushes, boiler tube ( without shank ) 

4301-1967 Brushes, foundry, flat 

4517-1967 Brush, welders' 

4580-1968 Brushes, shaving 

4584-1968 Brushes, hair 

5060-1969 Glossary of terms used in brusliware industry 

5078-1969 Brushes, typewriter 

5080-1969 Brushes, nail cleaning 

5207-19G9 Brushes, clothes 

r)5()5 (Partl)-1969 Dental brushes, engine: Part I Brushes for use with straight and 
right-angle hand pieces 

5565 ( Part II )-1969 Dental brushes^ engine: Part 11 Brushes for use with porte 
polisher 

5683-1970 Brushes, push-sweeping ', without handle ) 

7457-1974 Brushes, flue 

7477-1974 Brushes, harness hard 



PUBLICATIONS OF (MDJAN STANDARDS INSTITUTJOIM 

INDIAN STANDARDS 

Over B QOQ Ijidlan Standards covering various sub|ecu have been 
1^1 u ltd so far. Of these* th^ standards belonging to the Cli^mkal 
Group Fall under the foUowlng categories: 



Acidi 

AdheiavQi 

Alcoholi and il!lt4 prodiicti 

AlEiiUi 

Carimikwarek in^meiwarei a.ni] labori- 

ChamiCEl hAiartti and iifetr 
ChA^lcilip inorgAriiiQ (mli^fillafiflOUl | 
Ch*mLc3ls:i QrjAnif: ( mJiE«lilan«oil9 } 
Ccal audi cokA 
C^dil carbon 111 ti<?n pf^idMCiJ 

Coated fabrks 

C-^sfD'orirA and EE^IEfe^ |Qt^di 

Dantll mitArill! 

Dr/inj Oil I 

0]^i IntermedJAtAl 

EluirQpbtirii^ ciivriilcili 

EKplDii^^ and p/r[3![4i(:Jiiii£ mai«rtBii 

Fertilizers 

Flllcrii ^cppp«r««nd |>!iCtr«i 

FoQtwi^ar 

Glaii iti^ |.la.stwmr« 

JFidusirli! gitlAI 



Inks ■nd iUhnd producit 

Ltbo rat o r^y gl4 1 iw i re th « rinomi c Irs 

ind ralitttd ippara^uf 
Lu ind Ik productis 

Lta^tiflTri IflaEhar t-ood* a.n-d laitii«r 
4rffi-iin|;f 

OTHER PUBLICATIONS 

ISI Bulli^iin ( Publiih^d Ev^ry Month ) 
Sqfigid Copv 

ArmijAl SubAcr^ptlcart 
StEinderdi : M-onlhly Addilifirs 

Single Copy 

Annual Subacrlprlian 
AnruBJ RvpOTia i i'fom lfli4fl-4§ Onward* J 
i$i H^ndboftii, 1S7S 



Lintifs und allied producti 

Ly'tr leant! and r-ALc*di predLP^ti 

Oil paj^es 

Olli A fa tin □leafiUDyt t«ed3 4nd 

fruit t 
Paini-ars^ rruterkali (fnlicellineouE} 
Paper and Its pfoducti 
Paper and pijlp b^ird pacKajEn^ 

iVaaC^maTs 
p^rfuciherf na^^ei'eali, natural arid 

syrxthetic 
Pfltf^lcum inii pitFolflijm productf 

PkiatQjfa^phic chemluls 

Plj^mcfits and •Xtiiid*r* 

Plistics 

Polishes 

Prim ins ^^'^S 

Ready ritlx^d l^H-lnci ind ^nimeli 

Kubber and rJ4lpb4r pd-ip^ucci' 

"SQiips and caEher lurfaca dCtlve 

a{enlf 
Tannin j matefiali and alLI«d 

products 
Thcrn^al iniuliiion maceHali 
Ttiinnirr* and au'lvem.i 
Varnishi^f and la^rqunr^s 
Water md wa-ier j^r-flatrrvvrit 
Wl^e< bas^ed piimli 
Unclassified 



Ftn 



34 00 



Ri 



Rs Ja* 



IN D IAN 3TAMD AHD3 IhlSTITUTIOM 



Maniik Bha>i^sn. 9 Bahadur Shah Zafsr 
TfilBphpnE 1 27 01 31 ( 2D IIms } 

VVs?i^E!hrn I Novially Chambeira, GranE Road 
Ea Etern : 6 C h dw i\ ng ri ee Ai>;pi oa-c ti 
Southern : 54 Ganaral Palteis Road 

' Pu^lipakV Nurmoriairi id Sheikh Marg. Khanpur 
" F ' QlackH Unity BIdg. NaragiinhdraJB Square 
XotM flQ-^Cl. S actor ISA 
6~e-SG;B7 Nampailv Stsiian Ro^d 

BXJ- Bidg ( Thiid FEu-Or )p Gaitdhi Maiddn £tiiit 



Maig- NEW DELHI llOOdZ 

Tetesnimt : Mmnakunitlim 







Telflphon^ 


eOMBAV 400007 


37S7 29 


CALCUTTA 700072 


23-Oa 0? 


MADRAS eOODOZ 


8 37ttl 


AHMEDABAD3Q0aDl 


2 03 91 


BANGAIOHE 


E^OQilS 


2 7S 49 


CHANDIGARH 


16001 a 


2 83 2Q 


HVDERABAO ^ 


500U01 


4 5711 


KAN PUN 20HC 


105 


82 73 


PAIN A eiMX>04 


2 &e 55 



Ph^ljiic^i 4t Pdittoif i^h, ^n IMbf, lodti 



