***•••**•••**••• 



tOT3 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
'The Right to Information, The Right to Live'" 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



IS 4682-7 (1974) : Code of Practice for Lining of Vessels 
and Equipment for Chemical Processes, Part VII: Corrosion 
and Heat Resistant Metals [MED 17: Chemical Engineering 
Plants and Related Equipment] 



c^iiii^^ac^^fc^ii ifm^>N:vs?gaTCAaiiTgs 



;5«. \V I iT^ft2i^5c:^>^ifi^ 



yy^^i^^^K^^ 




-k 




Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge'' 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 



'^liSSlfi, 





5> 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS: 4682 (Part VII) -1974 

( Reaffirmed 2006 ) 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 

LINING OF VESSELS AND EQUIPMENT FOR 

CHEMICAL PROCESSES 

PART VII CORROSION AND HEAT RESISTANT METALS 

( Second Reprint FEBRUARY 1993 ) 



UDC 66'023-3 : 621 642 : 669018 8 



© Copyright 1975 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Gr 9 May 1975 



IS : 4fi82 (Part VII) - 1974 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 

LINING OF VESSELS AND EQUIPMENT FOR 

CHEMICAL PROCESSES 

PART VII CORROSION AND HEAT RESISTANT METALS 

Chemical Engineering Sectional Committee, EDG 57 

Chairman Representing 

Dr O. p. Kharbamda Larsen & Toubro Limited, Bombay 

Members 

Shri p. M. Mehta {Alternate to 
Dr O. P. Kharbanda) 
Shri A. K. Basu Indian Institute of Chemical Engineers, Calcutta 

Prof G. S. R. Narasimahamurty {Alternate) 
Shri S. D. Bhasin I. C. I. (India) Private limited, Calcutta 

Shri S. Sen Gupta (AltenutU) 
Shri B. R. Bhattacharjee The A. P. V, Engineering Co Private Ltd, 

Shri B. Banerjee {AltemaU) Calcutta 

Shri A. K. Bose Diiectorate General of Technical Development, 

New Delhi 

Shri A. B. AIaluck {Alternate) 
Dr K. S. Chari The Fertilizer Association of India, New Delhi 

Shri T. T. Cherian Oil and Naturad Gas Commission, Dehra Dun 

Shri A. Duttamajompar TheFertilizer Corporation of India Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri N. K. Seturam {Alternate) 
Dr L. K. Doraiswamy Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, New 

Delhi 

Shri M. V. Kunte {Alternate) 
Dr H. E. Eouljee Indian Chemical Manufacturers' Associatioi!, 

Calcutta 
Shri R. S. Grover The Ralph M. Parsons Co of Asia, Bombay 



Shri B. D. Mello (Alternate) 



{Continued m page 2) 



O Copyright 1975 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV of 1957) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by an^ means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an mfringement of copyjris^t under the said Act. 



IS : 4082 OPart VII) * 1974 

{ConUmud from page 1) 

Members Representing 

Dr H. K. Jobhi Indian Oil Corporation Ltd (Refineries Division), 

New Delhi 
Shri K. G. Jain {Alternate) 
Prof N. R. Kamath Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay 

Shri K. A. Naik (Alternate) 
Shri J. P. Kapxjr Indian Chemical Manufacturers Association, 

Calcutta 
Shri R. Kaudas {Alternate) 
Dr M, G. Krishna Indian Institute of Petroleum (CSIR), Dchra 

Dun 
Shri H. K. Mulchandani {Alternate) 
Shri K. Mantvanan Directorate of Indvistrics, Government of Haryana, 

Chandigarh 
Shri B. B. Mathur The Delhi Cloth and General Mills Co Ltd, 

Delhi 
Shri I. B. Lai. {Alternate) 
Shri Y. R. Mehta Engineers' India Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri R. C. Misra Heavy Electricals (India) Ltd, Bhopal 

Shri K. G. Mohan Hindustan Steel Ltd, Ranchi 

Shri G. N. Khastagir {Alternate) 
Shri K. Mukherjee Walchandnagar Industries Ltd, Bombay 

Shri R. C. Rathi (Alternate) 
Shri P. K. Pai Esso Standard Refinmg Co of In,dia Ltd, Bombay 

Shri H. B. Desai {Alternate) 
Shri R. Prabhakar Tata Chemicals Ltd, Mithapur 

Shri S. N. Bhattacharya {AltemaU) 
Shri R. V. Raghavan Vijay Tanks and Vessels Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shri B. S. Rajpal DESMET (India) Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shri K. S. Seshadri (Alternate) 
Dr N. Rajasekharan Pennwalt India Ltd, Bombay 

Shri J. S. Kaul (Alternate) 
Shri A. P. Rao Bharat Heavy Plate and Vessels Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri M. Venkataratnam (Alternate) 
Shri H. S. Rao Lloyd's Register of Shipping, Bombay 

Shri B. R. K. Gupta (AltemaU) 
Shri V. M. Rao The K. C. P. Ltd, Madras 

Shri K. Sambasiva Rao {AltemaU) 
Shri R. Sadagopa Ghari Burmah-Shell Refineries Ltd, Bombay 

Shri S. L. Aranha (Alternate) 
Shri D. S. Sastry Hindustan Organic Chemicals Ltd, Bombay 

Shri D. P. Dani (AltemaU) 
Dr J, K. N. Shabma National Physical Laboratory (CSIR), New Delhi 

Shri S. Subbiah Directorate General of Supplies & . Disposals, 

New Delhi 
Dr V. C. Thakar Associated Cement Companies Ltd, Bombay 

Shri A. K. Misser (AlternaU) 
Dr Y. Venicatesham National Research Development Corporation of 

India, New Delhi 
Dr D. S. ViswAnath Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 

Dr p. K. Deshpande (AlternaU) 
Shri S. M. Razvi, Director General, ISI (Ex-officio Member) 

Director (Mcch Engg) (Secretary) 

(Continued on page 41) 



IS r4^2 (Part VI!) -.1974 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 

LINING OF VESSELS AND EQUIPMENT FOR 

CHEMICAL PROCESSES 

PART VII CORROSION AND HEAT RESISTANT METALS 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard (Part VII) was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 31 July 1974, after the draft finalized by the CHienucal 
Engineering Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical 
Engineering Division Council. 

0.2 This standard is beir^ issued in many parts; the corrosion and heat 
resistant metal lining of vessels and equipment is covered in this part; the 
other types of linings are covered in the remaining parts of this standard. 

0,3 This part of the code offers guidance to manufacturers and users of vessels 
lined with corrosion and heat resistant steels. It is advisable to test the 
suitability of the lining material for the particular service conditions envi- 
saged before lining is commenced. Preliminary tests should be carried 
out with welded test panels in the corrosive conditions under consideration. 
This code does not offer guidance on the selection of any particular metal 
or method of lining to meet specific corrosion conditions. It does not 
include the deposition of metal by electrolysis or by spraying. 

©•4 Metal linings in the form of sheets or strips can be applied to vessels 
and equipment of steel construction by the use of welding. Sheet or strip 
material may also be used for the fabrication of linings which may be loose 
or mechanically attached to a vessel of steel or other materiaL 

0.5 Vessels can also be manufactured firom steel plates to which a layer 
of the reqmred lining metal has been integrally bonded during the manu- 
facture of the plate. Clad plates of this type can be obtained in many 
grades of stainless steel and the nickel-rich corrosion resistant alloys. 

0.6 Lining of the surfaces of vessels and eqviipment can also be accomplished 
by the overlay method of welding whereby a continuous surface of weld 
m.etal is laid down. 

0.7 A combination of two or more of the above methods may be used 
together while lining the surfaces of vessels and equipment. 



IS : 4682 (Part VII) - 1974 

0^ It is desirable that early consultation and exchange of infornaation should 
take place between the lining contractor and all parties concerned in the 
design, manufacture, erection and use of the vessels. Appendix A gives 
details of information to be exchanged at this stage. 

0.9 In the preparation of this standard considerable assistance has been 
derived from BS GP 3003 : Part 7 : 1970 Xining of vessels and equipment 
for chemical processes, Part 7 Corrosion and heat resistant metals' issued 
by the British Standards Institution. 

0.10 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing 
the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. 
The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should 
be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard (Part VII) lays down recommendations on the design 
of corrosion and heat resistant metal linings, method of application of 
linings, inspection and testing. 

1,1.1 This does not cover deposition of metal by electrolysis* spraying 
or by explosion. 

2. MATERIALS FOR LININGS 

2.1 Martensitic/Ferridc Corrosion Resisting Steds — Martensitic/ 
ferritic corrosion resisting steel containing 11*5 to 14 percent chromium 
and with carbon content controlled to a maximum of 008 percent is suitable 
for linings subjected to the less onerous corrosive conditions. The fact 
that the coefficient of thermal expansion of these steels is very close to that 
of carbon steels commonly used for vessels requiring linings minimizes the 
stresses set up between lining and vessel at the points of attachment during 
operation at high temperatures. These materials have air-hardening pro- 
perties and are susceptible to cracking in the weld or heat-affected zone. 
They can be obtained in sheet, strip or plate or as a cladding on carbon, 
carbon manganese and low alloy steels. 

2.2 Anstenitic Stainless Steels — Austenitic stainless steels complying 
with IS : 6911 -1972 1 are grades of chromium nickel stainless steels offering 
good corrosion resistant properties both in the as wrought condition and 
after welding. It is an advantage to control the carbon content to as low 
a figure as practicable in the lining materials as some inevitable carbon 
pick-up, however slight, should be anticipated from the welding processes 

*Rul^ for rounding off numerical values (rmsed), 
tSpecification for stainless steel plate, sheet and strip. 



IS z4€SZ (Part VH) « 1974 

used in fixing the lining to the vessel. All of the above materials can be 
obtained in solid form or as a cladding on carbon, carbon manganese and 
low alloy steels. 

When any of these materials are to be used for linings required to operate 
at temperatures above 100°C, consideration should be given to the possible 
■effect of the difference in coefficient of thermal expansion of these grades of 
stainless steel compared with carbon, carbon manganese and low alloy 
steels. 

11,3 Nickel — Nickel of 99 percent minimum purity is commonly used in 
industry and has good resistance to corrosion, particularly by alkalis. This 
metal, however, should not be used in contact with highly oxidizing acids 
or salts. The grade of nickel to be selected is dependent upon the service 
conditions for which the plant is designed. 

2 A Other Metals — Subject also to demotistration and suitability for the 
proposed fabrication and service, other weldable corrosion or heat resistant 
metals based on iron, nickel and/or cobalt may be used. 

3. DESIGN OF VESSELS AND EQJLFIPMENT FOR LINING 
3.1 Design Considerations 

3.1.1 General — In general, it is recommended that vessels i:o be fitted 
with a corrosion resistant lining should be of welded construction from 
carbon, carbon manganese or low alloy steel plates, using butt- welded joints 
wherever possible. The inner weld beads should be ground off flush and 
smooth in order to ensure that the lining plates can bed down witb good 
contact against the inner walls of the vessel over the whole area. 

Wherever possible, the shape should be cylindrical with ends either flat, 
conical or dished and with as large a radius as possible in any corners which 
occur. Irregular shapes can be Uned but will be more difficult and costly. 

The vessel should be fabricated and tested in accordance with recognized 
standards of good design and practice to suit the operating conditions, 
with the thickness of the shell and ends being adequate to meet the required 
strength under operating pressures and temperatures. For guidance on 
these requirements, reference may be made to IS : 803-1962* and IS : 
2825-19691. Whether the lining is attached to the wall or not it is not 
generally considered in the calculations to determine the strength of the 
vessel. In respect of integrally clad plates credit for cladding thickness 
should be considered in basing the design calculations. No corrosion 
allowance need be made in assessing the thickness of the shell. If thermal 
stresses are likely to be set up by the attachment of the corrosion resistant 
lining then the necessary allowances should be mads in the design of the 

♦Code of practice for design, fabrication and erection of vertical mild steel cylmdrical 
welded oil storage tanks. 

tGode for unftrcd pressure vessels. 



IS : 4682 (Part VU) - 1974 

vessel. Post weld heat treatment should be given as specified in 
IS : 2825-1969*. 

The required thickness of lining will depend upon the intbrmation avail- 
able concerning corrosion under operating conditions. The selection of 
the correct type of material to meet these conditions is important and it is 
recommended that welded test plates of the chosen lining material be sub- 
jected to searching tests under the worst operating conditions before a final 
selection is made. It is necessary that the corrosion rate of the lining be 
known so that the thickness of the lining can be made adequate for the 
intended life of the vessel. 

The drawing of the vessel should give full details of construction, including 
any holes through the shell that are required for test purposes and the 
method of lining shoidd also be shown. These test holes should be drilled 
through the shell before the lining is applied. If the sheet lining method 
is to be used then due attention to access should be given, and if this is 
through a manhole then the design of the lining should cater for this and pre- 
tabrication outside the vessel limited to the extent it is necessary. It may be 
considered an economy in some cases to fully flange one end of the vessel 
in order to simplify the access for sheet lining. 

Should the vessel be required to have good heat transfer properties, it is 
reconuncnded that clad steel or weld overlay be used for construction. 
If sheet or strip lining is required then means other than jackets should be 
ttsed to heat or cool the contents of the vessel. Internal coils of pipes or 
external heat exchangers are suitable means of providing heat transfer 
surfaces in such cases. 

3.1.2 Internal Fittings — Where internal fittings are required, such as 
support rings, brackets, coil supports, footstep bearings, etc> it is normal to 
fabricate these from solid corrosion resistant alloy of the same specification 
as the lining material. Where these are fixed to the vessel wall and are 
expected to carry some load under operating conditions, it is desirable to fix 
them in position before h'ning is commenced, using a suitable welding tech- 
nique to minimize dilution of the weld by the shell material. The lining can 
then be arranged to shield this weld and the weld attaching the lining to 
fitment will then be undiluted corrosion resistant alloy. It is essential that 
such junctions of fittings to shell wall be fully detailed on a drawing and 
approved. 

Internal fittings may be fitted direct to the lining when the vessel is 
constructed of clad plate or the lining is by weld overlay, provided special 
precautions are taken to ensure the integrity and strength of the bond. 

3«1.3 External Fittings — Special care should be taken in designing the 
fittings on a vessel whidi break through the shell, such as manholes, branches, 
*jght gkksses, agitator glands, etc. These may be in solid corrosion resistant 
material, as in Fig. 1, for simplicity, but this can prove expensive. 

*Ck>de for uxifired ^htcssutc vessels. 




SOLID ALLOY 



ALLOY WELD 



IS : 4602 (Part VII) - 1974 

STEEL SHELL 

ALLOY LINING 
ALLOY WELDS 

ALLOY BRANCH 



'^^M^mmm 




Fig. 1 Solid Alloy Branch 



Carbon steel fittings may be adequate provided good provision is made 
for a continuous lining of the corrosion resistant material to be welded on all 
surfaces exposed to the product. Extra care is needed where such linings 
on the fittings meet the shell lim'ng, and provision for anchoring the latter in 
the area adjacent to any fittings should be studied to avoid operational 
stresses damaging the shell lining. 

3.1.4 Flanged Openings — The corrosion resistant lining should be taken 
on to the sealing surface of the joint face of all flanged openings. Whenever 
possible, branches, nozzles, manholes, etc, with flanged faces should be 
lined before attaching them to the shell so that the joint face can be machined 
after welding {see Fig. 2). Where this is not possible, it is necessary to take 
precautions so that subsequent welding does not unduly distort the joint 
face. 

With pressure vessels the flanges will be thick enough for the faces to 
be fitted with a corrosion resistant bar or plate between 6 mm and 12 mm 
thick inserted within the bolt circle (see Fig. 3). Provision should be made 
for this in the design of the flanges as this gives a good facihty for making 
a sound undiluted attachment to tiie lining. 

3.2 Materials for Vessels 

3.2.1 Carbon or Carbon Manganese Steels — Carbon or carbon manganese 
steels are the most suitable group of materials from which a vessel shotild be 
constructed if it is to be subsequently fitted with a lining. The quality 
and thickness of the material chosen should be such that the subsequent 
welding of the lining in position will not adversely affect the structure of the 
vessel. 



IS:46a2 (Part Vn) - 1974 



THIS FACE MACHINED 
AFTER WELDING 




ALLOY FACING 



ALLOY WELDS 



STEEL BRANCH 



ALLOY LINING 



Fig. 2 Flanged Opening with Alloy Facing 



THIS FACE MACHINED 
AFTER WELDING 




ALLOY RING INSERT 



ALLOY LINING 



Fig. 3 Flanged Opening 



The surfaces to be lined should be smooth and clean and free from scale. 
Iron grit blasting is recommended as a suitable finish. The vessel should 
preferably be of welded construction throughout, with all internal welds 
ground smooth and Hush. Where an existing steel vessel of riveted design 
is being considered for lining, the riveted joints should be finally sealed by a 
cover strip, as shown in Fig. 4. 

8 



IS : 4682 ^art VII) - 1974 



SEAL WELD 



THIS SPACE TO BE REDUCED TO A 
MINIMUM IN PRACTICE TO REDUCE 
PROBLEMS OF AIR EXPANSION 




INTERMITTENT WELD 



Fig. 4 Riveted Joint Cover 

Where higher operating temperatures or pressures, or both, are necessary, 
then low alloy steels may be required. 

3.2.2 Cast Iron — -Where it is necessary for an existing cast iron vessel 
to be lined, this can be satisfactorily carried out using studs attached to 
the reverse side of the lining and passing through the vessel wall, as shown 
in Fig. 5. No attempt should be made to weld lining materials directly 
to the surface of ordinary grey cast iron vessels. Backing strips are screwed 
to the cast iron where any welded joints in the lining occur. 



CAST IRON SHELL 



STUD WELDED TO 
BACK OF UNtNG 




LINING 



Fig. 5 Stud Fixing Method — Cast Iron Shells 

Another method of construction is one where the lining is riveted to the 
cast iron vessel by rivets of the same material as the lining. Small sized 
rivetsmay be used with considerable benefit. 

3.2.3 Concrete — Concrete is a suitable material for large vessels, and 
provision for the fixing of a lining to new vessels should be included in the 



IS : 4682 (Part VII) - 1974 

design of the vessel. For existing v^sels suitable backing strips of steel 
can be fixed at the points where joints in the lining occur, as shown in 
Fig. 6. New concrete vessels that are to be lined can have suitable steel 
backing strips cast in position, as shown in Fig. 7. 

In order to avoid corrosion behind the lining, it may Idc necessary to apply 
a coating to the vessel, such as bitumen. 



THI S SPACE TO BE REDUCED TO A 
MINIMUM m PRACTICE TO REDUCE 
^PROBLEMS OF AIR EXPANSION 



STEEL BATTEN 



WOODEN PLUGS 
IN CONCRETE 




LINING 






Fig. 6 Batten Fixing Method — Existing Concrete Vessels 

3.2.4 Wood — New and used vessels of wood are suitable for lining but 
attention should be drawn to the danger of shielding corrosion of the 
surface lining in contact with the wood, if the wood becomes wet. If a 
used vessel is to be lined it should be thoroughly cleaned and prepared to 
ensure against the outer surface of the lining being attached. A number 
of backing strips should be screwed or nailed flush with the surface of the 
vessel to be lined where the joints in the lining occur. The methods of 
lining the vessels are shown in Fig. 8. 

3.3 Clad Vessels — A vessel designed to be made from clad material 
should have special attention given to ensure that a continuous cladding to 
the inner surfaces is practicable. Glad plates are available with varying 
thicknesses of cladding and backing plates. 

Because of welding difficulties it is recommended that the cladding should 
not be less than 10 mm. For plates up to 12 mm thick it is suggested that 
20 percent cladding fulfils normal requirements and as the total plate 



10 



CONTINUOUS WELDS 



IS :4682 (Part VII) - 1974 

LINING 




JE BAR WITH OCCASIONAL 
REINFORCWG RODS WELDED 
TO FLANGE FOR ANCHORAGE 
A 



FILLET BUTT WELD 



LINING 




IeE bar with OCCASIONAL 
REINFORCING RODS WELDED 
TO FLANGE FOR ANCHORAGE 

B 

Fig. 7 Methods of Fixing Lining — New Concrete Tanks 

thickness increases the percentage of cladding may decrease. Cn thick 
plates a cladding of 2 5 to 3 mm is usually sufEcient to meet corrcsion 
rtq'airements. 

Glad plates can be obtained in a variety of sizes and frequently tLuse are 
greater in size than those obtainable in the solid alloy. The cladding is 
metallurgically bonded to the steel backing plates during manufact'ire. 

Where there is a differential coefficient of expansion between the crjbon 
steel backing plate and the cUdding, account should be taken of the iiUernal 
stresses which may be produced in the vessel by the temperature variations. 



U 



IS:4682 (Part VII) - 1974 

The vessel should be desigriGd for welded construction throughout and 
all welds should be fully detailed on a drawing. In welding clad steels it 
is important to ensure that the continuity of cladding is preserved and that 
tiie corrosion resistance of the weld is not impaired by dilution with the 
parent metaL 



LINING SHEET 



CONTINUOUS WELDS 



WOOD 




RACKING STRIP OF LINING MATERIAL 
60 TO 75mm X 2 mm NAILED OR SCREWED 
TO WOOD AND HOUSED IN FLUSH 
A 



WOOD 

CONTINUOUS WELD ON BACKING STRIP 
OF LINING MATERIAL 50 TO 75 mm X 2 mm 
NAILED OR SCREWED TO WOOD 
AND HOUSED IN FLUSH 




WOOD 



INSERT OF INERT 
MATERIAL (OR 
LINING ALLOY 1 



Fig. 8 Joints in Linings for Timber Vessels 
12 



IS : 4682 (Part Vn)- 1974 

A welded clad vessel may be heat-treated after fabrication^ if necessary. 
Due account should be given to the effect of this heat treatment which it 
may have on the backing plates and on the lining materials. 

4. DESIGN OF LININGS 

4.1 Cveneral Factors Affecting Design — The design of lining used will 
depend upon a number of considerations including: 

a) range of operating temperature, 

b) range of operating pressure, 

c) corrosive media present, 

d) erosion, 

e) accessibility of inner surface for application of lining, 

f) whether lined during original manufacture or after installation, 

g) condition of vessel if already in service, and 
h) cost. 

4.2 Integral Gladding — The integral cladding method of lining can be 
considered only when a vessel is being initially designed for lining. The 
•design considerations for the manufacture of clad vessels are dealt with 
under 3.3. Vessels made from clad material using the recommended welding 
techniques probably offer the best solution to all the relevant design consi- 
derations in 4.1. The bonding of the Hning to the shell is good and there- 
fore suitable for vacuum conditions, and this method also gives very good 
heat transfer properties. A variety of corrosion resistant metals is a/ailable 
for the designer's choice. The hazard of dilution of the weld met;*^ is not 
great if the approved weld techniques are followed. 

Weld preparation on the edges of plates to be butt- welded together is 
important {see Fig. 9) and alignment before welding is vital if sound welds 
are to be achieved, as shown in Fig. 10. 

Four methods of butt-welding plates are in satisfactoiy use, the first, 
shown in Fig. 1 1 , being suitable for all ranges of thickness of plate and 
•cladding. The method shown in Fig. 12 is more suited to thick plates and 
the third and fourth methods, shown in Fig. 13 and 14, are used when 
only one side of the plate is accessible to the welder. Tables 1 and 2 give 
reconunended alloys for the electrodes used in the welding of clad steels. 

Two methods of arranging flanged openings in clad vessels are shown in 
Fig. 15 and 16. In both cases provision is made for the sound junction of 
the flange to the shell plate while at the same time preserving continuity 
of the clad surface. 

4.3 Sheet lining — The sheet method of lining utilizes sheet material for 
lining and the sheet is usually applied in the largest pieces that can be 
handled on the particular application. The sheets are attached to the 
vessel shell by plug welding through pierced holes {sm Fig. 17A), or by spot 
welding as shown in Fig. 1 7B. When being attached to a finished vessel the 
sheets should be held to conform closely to the inner surface contour whilst 
being fixed and should be securely held in position during welding. 

13 



TABLE 1 FILLER WIRES FOR WELDING MARTENSITIG AND AUSTENITIG STAINLESS STEELS AND NICKEL ALLOYS AND FOR 
WELDING MARTENSmC AND AUSTENITIC STAINLESS STEELS ANDvNIG|C£L ALLOYS TO MILD STEEL, ALSO FOR 
WELDING THE GLAD SIDE OF GLAD STEEL — INERT GAS TUNGSTEN ARC AND INERT GAS METAL ARC PROCES! 









( 


[CUuse 4.2) 










? 


Claodino 


Specification 


Filler Wire 




Filler Wire Specification 




Remarxs 




Plates 
















<f^ 




•Root Pass 


SuWequent** 


R6ot Pass 


Subsequent 


Root Pass 


Subsequent 












Passes 


TIG to 


Passes 


MIG to 


passes 












18:5856- 


TIG to 


IS: 5856- 


MIG to 












1970* 


IS: 5856- 
1970* 


1970* 


IS: 5856- 
1970* 




! 


(t) 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


(5) 


(6j 


C7) 


(8) 


(9) 


2 


12% Cr 


IS :69n- 


25/12 CrNi 


25/12 CrNi 


S-B04 (2-0- 


S-B04 (20- 


S-B04 (20- 


S-B04 (2 0- 


If service conditions 


»^ 




1972t 


(preferably 


(preferably 


30% Mo 


30% Mo 


3-0% Mo 


30% Mo 


demand weld de- 








molybde- 


motybde. 


preferable) 


prefer- 


preferable) 


prefer- 


posit of similar 








num bear- 


num bear- 




able) 




able) 


composition to the 








ing) 


ing) 










cladding, a spe- 
cial low carbon 
12% Gr wire 
should be used 
and a preheat of 
200'>G is recom- 
mended. A post 
weld heat treat- 
ment of 700.750''C 
is also desirable. 




18/8 CrNi or 


18:6911- 


25/12 CrNi 


18/8 CrNi 


S-B04 (20- 


S-BOlNb 


S.B04 (20- 


S-BOlNb 






18/8 CrNi 


1972t 


(preferably 




3-0% Mo 




3-0% Mo 








and Nb 




molybde- 




preferable) 




preferable) 








stabilized 




num bear- 
ing) 
















18/8/3 


IS: 6911- 


25/12 CrNi 


18/8/3 


S-B04 (2-0- 


S.BO2M0 


S-B04 (20- 


S-B02M0 






CrNiMo 


1972t 


(preferably 


CrNiMo 


30% Mo 




3-0% Mo 
preferable) 












molyb,de- 




preferable) 














num bear- 




















in?) 
















25/12 CrNi 




25/12 CrNi 
(preferably 
n;t«tybde- 
num bear- 

mi) 


25/12 CrNi 


S.B04 (20- 
3-0% Mo 
preferable) 


S-B04 


S-B04 (20. 
3-0% Mo 

Feferal^lc) 


S-B04 







25/20 CrNi 



25/20 CrNi 
(preferably 
molybde- 
num bear- 
ing) 



25/20 CrXJ 



S.B04 (20- 
30% MO 

plrcfcrablc) 



S-B05 



S-B04 (20- 
30% Mo 
preferable) 



S-B05 



Nickel 



Nickel with Ti and Al addi- 
tions 



IS: 5857- 
1 970 J 
S-Ni 1 



IS: 5857- 
1970 J 
S-Ni2 



XiGu alloy 



NiCu alloy with Ti and Al IS: 5857: 

additions 1970J; 

S-Ni2 



18:5857- 
I970t 
S-Ni 2 



NiCrFc alloy 



80/20 NiCr IS: 5857- 

1370^ 
S-Ni 3 

NiCrFe alloy with No, NiCrFe IS : 5857- 

aiioy with Ti 1370 J 

S-Ni 4 



18:5857- 

i97Qt 
S-Ni 3 

IS: 5957- 
1370$ 
S-Ni 5 



Contains 3% man- 
ganese. Deposits 
from this wire will 
age-harden at 

s tr e s 3 - relieving 
temperatures of 
steel. - 



Ui 



•Specification for corrosioii and heat-resisting ehromiuni'nicke! steel solid welding rods and bare electrodes. 

t Specification for stauitess steeU plate, sheet and strip. 

{Specification for nickel and nickel alloy bare solid welding rods and electrodes. 



TABLE 2 FLUX COATED ELECTRODES FOR JOINING MARTENSITIC AND AUSTENlTiC STAINLESS STEELS AND NICKEL 
ALLOYS TO STEEL, AND FOR WELDING THE CLAD SIDE OF GLAD STEEL — MANUAL METAL ARC PROCESS ONLY 







iClauii 4.2) 




Gladding 
Matbrial 


Specification 

FOR Backing 

Plates 


Electrode Material 


Electrode Specification 


Root Pass Subsequent Passes 


Root Pass Subsequent Passes 


(I) 


(2) 


(3) (4) 


(5) (6) 


12% Gr 


15:6911-1972* 


25/12 GrNi (pre- 25/12 GrNi (pre- 
ferably molyb- ferably molyb- 
denum bearing) denum bearing) 


IS : 5206 - 19691 IS : 5206 - 1969t 
S.B04 (2 0- S-B04 (2-0- 
30% Mo addi- 3 % Mo addi- 
tion preferable) tion preferable) 



a 



18/8 CrNi 



18/8 CrNiTi or 
Nb stabilized 



15:6911-1972* 



15:6911-1972* 



18/8/3 CrNiMo IS: 6911-1972* 



25/12 GrNi 



25/20 GrNi 



25/12 GrNi (pre- 
ferably molyb- 
denum bearing) 



23/12 GrNi (pre- 
ferably molyb- 
denum bearing) 



25/12 GrNi (pre- 
ferably molyb- 
denum bearing) 



25/12 GrNi (pre- 
ferably molyb- 
denum bearing) 



18/8 GrNi 



18/8 GrNi (Nb 
stabilized) 



18/8/3 GrNiMo 



25/12 GrNi 



25/12 GrNi (pre- 25/20 GrNi 
ferably molyb- 
denum bearing) 



IS: 5206 - 1969t 
S-B04 (2-0- 
30% Mo addi- 
tion preferable) 

IS : 5206 - 1969t 
S-B04 (2-0- 
3-0% Mo addi- 
tion preferable) 

IS : 5206 - 19691 
S-B04 (20- 
30% Mo addi- 
tion preferable) 

IS : 5206 - 1969t 
S-B04 (20- 
3-0% Mo addi- 
tion preferable) 



IS : 5206 - 1 969t IS : 5206-1 969t 
S-B04 (2-0- S-B05 

3 0% Mo addi- 
tion preferable) 



IS: 5206-19691 
S-BOl 



IS: 5206-19691 
S-BOlNb 



IS: 5206-1969t 
S-B03M0 



IS: 520fi-1969t 
S-B04^ 



Remarks 



(7) 

If service conditions 
demand electrodes 
of similar composi- 
tion to the cladding! 
a special low carbon 
12% Ct wld rod 
should be used and 
preheat of 200''C i« 
reccmmended. A 
post weld heat treat- 
ment at TOO-TSO-C 
is also desirable. 



♦Specification for stainless stcelj plate, sheet and strip. 

^Specification for corrosion-resisting chromium and chromium-nickel steel covered electrodes for manual metal arc welding. 



IS 1 4682 (Part VII) - 1974 



STEEL 




30 TO i,S 



STEEL 



XLADOING 



■t.5rnm 
ROOT FACE 




'CLADDING 



R3 TO ■5mm 



t.5mm 
ROOT FACE 



Fig. 9 Agceptabll Types of Edge Preparation of Clad Plates 

FOR Welding 




INCORRECT 



Fig. 10 Edge Alignment of Clad Plate for Welding 

Sheet lining is not recommended where severe temperature, gradients or 
frequent cyclic operations occur. For steady temperatures or vacuum 
working the spacing of plug welds should not exceed 75 mm between centres. 
Where vessels operate at normal pressure and room temperature, spacings 
up to 300 mm can be considered. 

Access for any preformed parts should be considered and this can dictate 
the size of pieces and the general pattern of lining adopted. 

Sheet lining offers a wide choice of materials and thicknesses, enabling 
most corrosion problems to be met. The risk of dilution of the lining 
material during its attachment to the shell should be carefully guard ^^ 
against and in general it is to be expected that where attachment is mauo 
directly to the shell by welding, spot welding or plug welding, some dilution 
of the lining will occur. Where this cannot be tolerated it is fo&t necessary 
to fix a pattern of backing strips to the shell to coincide with the joints in the 
lining sheets and then weld the lining to these. 

Sheet linings are not the most suitable for vacuum working conditions, 
and for this duty should be avoided if possible in favour of other methods. 
Variations in temperature can also lead to weld fractures where the lining 
material difters in expansion coefficient from the shell material. Due to 
the air space present, heat transfer across the lined shell wall is poor. 



17 



IS : 4682 (Part Vn)- 1974 




BACKING 



CLAOOING 



WELD BACKING PLATE SIDE COMPLETELY 
USING CARBON STEEL ELECTRODES- ENSURE 
THAT WELD BEAD 1 DOES NOT PENETRATE 
1.5 mm ROOT FACE 

•A 




BACKING 



TURN OVER AND CUT BACK CLAD SIDE TO 
CLEAN METAL WITH REGULAR PROFILE 

B 




BACKING 



MAKE ROOT RUN OF WELD 1 USiNO HIGH ALLOY 
ELECTRODE WELD 2 WITH ALLOY EQUAL TO CLAOOING 

c 

Fig. 11 Welding Sequence for Glad Plate 



18 



IS : 4682 (Part Vn)- 1974 



Aladding 




t.Smm 



BACKING 



CUT AWAY CLADDING FOR 



APPROX 20 TO 25 mm 
A PLATE EDGE PREPARATION 

BACKING 




/CLADDING 



B COMPLETELY WELD BACKING PLATE AND 
GRIND FLUSH ON CLAD SIDE 



ALLOY WELD 
AS CLADDING 



HIGHER ALLOY 
COMBAT DILUTK)N 



CLADDING 




BACKING 



C WELD CLAD SIDE WITH TWO LAYERS 

Fig. 12 Welding Sequence for Clad Plates — Thick Plates 



19 



IS : 4682 (Part VH) - 1974 




PLATE EDGE PREPARATION 
BACKING 



CLADDING 



1.5mm GAP FOR THICK CLADDING. 
"To GAP REQUIRED FOR THIN CLADDING 



WELD CLADDING IN ROOT WITH GOOD 
PENETRATION USING TIG WELDING 
.WITHOUT FILLER METAL IF CLADDING THIN 




TEMPORARY BACK-UP 
COPPER STRIP USED 
IF ACCESS PERMITS 



JIG WELD WITH SOFT 
JRON FILLER WIRE 




WELDING BY SHALLOW PENETRATION 
PROCEDURE WITH DEPOSITING OF 
METAL OF BACKING STEEL 

TUj WELD WITH FILLER 
METAL COMPATIBLE 
WITH CLADDING 

VG WELD WITHOUT 
FILLER METAL IF 
CLADDING THIN 



Note — In some cases it may be desirable to weld completely in alloy electrodes. 

Fig. 13 Welding Sequence for Glab Plate with Access to Backing 

Side Only 



20 



.70* TO 9d*^ 




IS : 4682 (Part VII) - 1974 

CLADDING 

BACKING 

TEMPORARY BACK UP 
COPPER STRIP IF 
ACCESS PERMITS 
U5mm ROOT FACE 



-r.Bmm GAP 
;PLATE EDGE PREPARATION 
A 



FIRST LAYER 
AL 




TOP LAYER OF WEtO 
USING ALLOY AS TOR 
CLADDING 



CLADDING 



BACKING 

'WELD BACKING MATERIAL USING 
ELECTRODES SUITABLE FOR THE 
BACKING MATERIAL 

B 

Fig. 14 Welding Sequence for Clad Plate with 
Access to the Cuvd Side Only 

The cost of installing sheet lining is appreciably less than strip lining and is 
best suited for use on existing vessels with good access, not too severe 
corrosive conditions and not under vacuum. 

4i4 Strip Lining — The strip method employs the use of small strips of 
lining material cut and formed to be a good fit to the inner surface of the 
vessel to be lined and welded into position. The entire surface is shielded 
in this manner and the pattern of strips employed is varied to suit the profile 
of the vessel. Depending upon the temperature range, also the pressure 
or vacuum expected, the width of the strips is varied from 150 to 5 mm 
{see Table 3). The length of strip will depend upon local conditions 
\see 5.3) . The reduced width for austenitic stainless steels is because of the 
higher thermal expansion compared with ferritic/martensitic steels and 
there is a greater susceptibility of the former to buckling. Dished heads 



21 



IS : 4682 (Part VII) - 1974 



and the knuckle radii joining them to the shell wall can be lined by a pattern 
of pieces as shown in Fig. 18 or 19. A number of different niethods can 
be employed to weld the strips in position to suit operational requirements 
and these fall into four main groups: (a) lap or joggle, (b) butt strap, 
(c) shingle, and (d) fillet butt. These are illustrated in Fig. 20. 

Strip lining offers better performance than sheet lining for fluctuating 
high temperature and pressure conditions. For vacuum conditions the 
width and thickness of the strip should be calculated. The hazard of dilution 
of the weld metal by the shell can largely be eliminated by the correct choice 
of welding technique. Access need not be more than is normal for any 
vessel and all parts can pass through a normal 450 mm manhole. Internal 
fittings can be sealed by the use of strips cut to suit. The surface conditions 
of used vessels should be brought to a reasonably smooth condition and 
any deep pitting welded up to ensure a good bond between lining and shell. 



SOLID CLADDING 
X^LLOY FLANGE 

V. 



THIS FACE MACHINED 
AFTER WELDING 




.^^WELD DEPOSIT TO 
MATCH CLADDING 

COMPATIBLE 
AILOY WELDS 



ALLOY CLAD 
SHELL PLATE 



Fig. 15 Solid Flange on Glad Shell 



ALLOY CLAD 
.FLANGE 



TH[S FACE MACHINED 
AFTER WELDING 




STEEL WELD 



WELDING DEPOSIT TO 
MATCH CLADDING 



COMPATIBLE 
ALLOY WELDS 



ALLOY CLAD 
SHELL PLATE 



Fig. 16 Alloy Glad Flange on Glad Shell 
22 



IS : 4682 (Part Vn)- 1974 



TABLE 3 MAXIMUM RECOMMENDED STRIP WIDTHS FOR 
VARYING TEMPERATURE CONDITIONS 

{Clause 4.4) 

Maximitm Operating MaximurI Strip Width 

Temperature 



Ferritic/Martensitic Austenitic Nickel 

Chromium Steels Chromium Steels 



Up to and including 230 150 150 

Over 230 to 400 115 to 130 75 to 100 

„ 400 " 455 100 65 to 75 

„ 455 " 510 90 — 

„ 510 " 540 75 — 



4.5 Weld Metal Overlay — A layer of Corrosion resistant weld metal is 
deposited on the inner surface of the shell. This is carried out by manipulat- 
ing the shell and using automatic or semiautomatic arc welding processes. 
For localized areas around branches and fittings manual arc weld deposits 
can be used. Some weld metal dilution is unavoidable in the first run and 
it may be necessary to make a second pass over the surface being clad, 
giving a much reduced pick-up from the shell material. 

However, by using an overalloyed filler material in relation to the cladding 
analysis desired, a satisfactory single layer cladding is sometimes possible. 
Preheating is recommended to minimize stresses. This method of lining is 
useful for thick vessels as an alternative to clad plate. It calls for a fabri- 
cation shop with specialist facilities to undertake the work and is more suitable 
for cylindrical vessels. 

4.6 Thickness of Limng 

4.6.1 General Consideration — The thickness of the lining material should 
be decided by considering the following: 

a) Desired life of vessel; 

b) Corrosion allowance; 

c) Erosion allowance; 

d) Complexity of shape of lining; 

e) Duty of the vessel, particularly with respect to temperature or 
pressure cycling and including start-up and shut-down and the 
possibility of vacuum conditions being encountered; 

f) Method of lining; 

g) Location where lining is to be carried out; and 
h) Cost. 

23 



IS: 4682 (Part VII). 1974 




FILL IN CENTRE 
WELD PERIPHERY \^^^ ^^^^"^ ^ELD 
FIRST WITH ALLOyX 
ELECTRODES \ 




A PLUG WELDING 

SPOT WELDING 



9^0K!iVQ9QQQiN»S9^^x^wvo>^Q»^ 



rJXf^^^^,^,^,^^yj^JMXf^MXfJX^M. 



B SPOT WELDING 
Fig. 17 Welds For Fixing of Lining Sheets 



It is prudent to calculate for the lining to last the total life of the vessel. 
Even with the provision of test and inspection holes, any failure in the 
lining is likely to be detected only after considerable damage is sustained 
by the outer shell. The correct choice of alloy for the lining is very 
important. 

Where erosion is expected, such as opposite tangential inlet branches, 
nozzles, etc, it is good practice to fit as thicker panel to act as a wear plate 
so that the losses by erosion match that by corrosion elsewhere in the vesseL 

4.6.2 Sheet Linings — Normally sheet linings are 3 mm thick. Sometimes, 
the thickness is increased to 45 mm in connection with severe corrosive or 
erosive conditions. Where the method of fixing is by fusion welding, linings 
thinner than 1 -5 mm are not recommended, as the application becomes very 
difficult and the increase in cost exceeds the saving in material. 

4.6.3 Strip Lining — Normally it is adequate for linings to be a maximum 
of 3 mm thick and a minimum of 1-5 mm. Strip linings are frequently 
made in 2 mm or 26 mm material with good results. These thicknesses 
enable the strips to be formed to the contour of dishings and corner radii 
where dishings and cyUnders meet. The longer straight strips on the 
cylindrical portion of vessels can be pushed into position by hand and tack 
welded into the shell without prior forming being exact. 



24 



REGULAR 
STRIP LINING 



PARALLEL 
PIECE 



WEDGE PIECE 



HEEL RADIUS 



IS : 4682 (Part Vn)- 1974 



DISHED CROWN ZONE 




KNUCKLE 
RADIUS ZONE 



NUMBERS SHOW SEQUENCE 
OF FIXING STRIPS 



DISHED ZONEO)^^ KNUCKLE Z0NE(2) 




CYLINDRICAL 
ZONE(I) 



WEDGE PIECES 
Fig. 18 Layout of Strips for Lining Dished Heads 



25 



iS : 4682 (Part VH) - 1974 



WELDING (WHEN COMPLETING RUN 1, 
ENSURE THAT LINING SEGMENTS ARE 
FIRMLY HELD AGAINST STEEL) 



EQUAL PITCHES 
BETWEEN CL OF 
OUTER SEGMENTS' 




TANGENTIAL INTERSECTION POINT 



EQUAL PITCHES 
BETWEEN CL OF 
INNER SEGMENTS 




50 mm 



^CL OF CLOSING SEAM /DATUM TANGENT LINE 

Fig. 19 Alternative Layout of Segments for Dished Heads 



26 



IS : 4682 (Part VH) - 1974 



CONTINUOUS INTERMITTENT CONTINUOUS WELDS_ 




INTERMITTENT WELDS 



A LAP OR JOGGLE METHOD B BUTT STRAP METHOD 



CONTINUOUS WELD 




jNTERMITTENT WELDS 

C SHINGLE METHOD 




D FILLET BUTT METHOD 
Fig. 20 Types of Strips Lining Methods 



27 



IS : 4682 (Part VH) - 1974 

It is recommended that strip linings not less than 15 mm thick be used 
for floors and walls of vessels where the welding will be done m the down- 
hand, vertical and horizontal positions. If overhead welding is required, 
such as for heads in situ, 2 mm is the minimum thickness recommended. 
Thinner linings can be used but they require a higher degree of welding 
skill and this, together with the necessity to be precise with the fitting, 
greatly adds to the labour costs and often will be more costly than heavier 
linings. 

4.6.4 Integral Cladding — Integral clad plates for vessels should have a 
jninimum of 1 mm of cladding if the plate is 5 mm thick. Twenty percent 
thickness of cladding is usually adequate for the normal range of plate 
thickness and on thick plates a maximum of 2*5 to 3 mm is generally 
sufficient. 

4.6.5 Weld Overlay — The minimum thickness of the corrosion resistant 
layer applied by this method is 2 mm. For severe service duty this should be 
increased to 6 mm. Weld overlays thinner than 2 mm are not recommended 
in view of the dilution effect from the base metal. To minimize the dilution 
effects it may be necessary to specify the minimum number of deposited 
layers. 

4.7 Internal Fittings in Lined Vessels — It is recommended that the 
material to be used for the fittings inside a vessel that is to be lined should 
be as resistant as that used for the lining, and wherever possible of the same 
alloy. 

The welding process and filler material should be chosen to give the best 
bond with the shell and the correct corrosion resistant properties. 

Great care should be taken to ensure that the lining is continuous in 
the vicinity of fittings. 

5. METHODS OF LINING 

5.1 Preparation of Material — The cutting of alloy material should be 
■done wifli great care, and where heat is being used for cutting the material 
the burnt material should be removed by mechanical means. Grinding 
should be done with an uncontaminated wheel and care exercised that large 
amounts of heat are not generated. 

In fabricating nickel and nickel alloys, precautions should be taken to 
prevent pick-up of sulphur. 

Before sheet- or strip linings or integfral clad plates are welded, all surfaces 
in the proximity of the weld zone should be cleaned. Oil and grease may 
be removed by a sxiitable solvent; light rust by wire brushing; and scale by 
grinding or grit blasting. The suppliers of materials have their recommend- 
ed methods for achieving clean conditions and these should generally be 
used. 

28 



IS :4682 (Part VH) - 1974 

Filler metals, such as bare wires or strips, should be degreased and flux 
coated electrodes should be oven-dried to manufacturer's recommendations. 

The surface of the vessel to be lined should be smooth and free of sudden 
changes in contour, and any blemishes made good. In the case of metal 
vessels, the surface to be lined may be rectified by welding and grinding, 
provided the necessary precautions applicable to the backing material are 
taken. 

In the case of the relining of wood vessels, these should be free of corrosive 
media, to avoid shielding corrosion. 

5.2 Sheet Lining 

5.2.1 General Considerations ■ — Sheet linings can be applied to steel, cast 
iron, concrete and wooden vessels. The layout of panels for the lining 
should be first detailed on drawings and then carefully cut out to the exact 
shape. With used vessels, which may be irregular in shape, it is some- 
times preferred to cut the exact shape of each piece as the job proceeds. 
Where the wall contour is irregular or acutely curved, preforming the 
panels near the contour is advisable. Where the material is severely cold 
worked it should be heat-treated and descaled before fitting. Where the 
contour is uniformly curved preforming may not be necessary, provided 
that the panels are properly pressed tightly against the shell wall by suitable 
struts or jacks. 

The size of the lining panels will depend upon access and should be as 
large as possible so as to reduce the welding of edges to a minimum. 

5.2.2 Carbon Steel Vessels — The holes for plug welding the centre of the 
panels to the vessel are usually punched or drilled, and with panels 3 mm 
thick and less, these need not be chamfered. For austenitic steel, punching 
should be avoided. The diameter of the holes should be between 12 mm 
and 25 mm. The plug holes are best welded by first welding the edge 
of the hole to the shell, forming an unbroken ring of weld. This can be 
wire brushed with a brush of a material compatible with that of the sheet 
and inspected before filling in the centre with weld as a separate operation. 
It is possible to combine the welding of the edge of the plug hole with the 
filling-in stage and in this case it is beneficial to reduce the hole size. 

The panel should be located in position by jacking or clamping, the 
central plug hole welded to the shell, and then work continued progressively 
outwards until all plug holes are tacked. The edge of the panel is then 
tack- welded to the shell with stitch welds about 12 to 25 mm long at not 
more than 150 mm centres. When the first panel has been fixed the ad- 
jacent ones should be similarly fixed before the edges of the panel are seal- 
welded to the shell. The gap between each panel should be between 6 mm 
and 8 mm according to thickness of the lining, and a three-weld bead tech- 
nique should be used, as in Fig. 20D. If desired, panels may be joggled 
and lapped over the adjacent panel as described in 5.3. 

29 



IS : 4682 (Part Vn) . 1974 

The lining may also be fixed to the shell by MIG-spot welding (inert gas 
consumable electrode spot welding) . This has the advantage that for thin 
linings no hole is required, which saves the cost of drilling and demands 
less care in positioning of the torch. With thicker linings a hole is required, 
but this will be much smaller (diameter equal to or little greater than the 
thickness) than that needed for plug welding. TIG-spot welding (inert gas 
tungsten arc spot welding) can be used, but is less advantageous in that a 
hole is necessary with smaller thickness of lining and there is probably 
more dilution; also the addition of filler wire has to be made manually. 

Where no weld dilution whatsoever can be permitted, backing strips of 
the same composition as the lining may be first fixed to the vessel wall to 
coincide with the pattern of joints in the panels of lining materials. These 
may be either welded, riveted or screwed in position, care being taken to 
stagger the fixing to miss any welds in the lining sheets. A small air space 
is unavoidable with this method, which would be undesirable in applications 
where good heat transfer qualities are required. 

5J23 Cast Iran Vessels — While attaching linings to cast iron vessels, 
studs through the vessel wall may be used to fix the lining panels from the 
outside, and this has the advantage of offering a very smooth and clean 
finish to the inner surface {see Fig. 5). Due to dijfficulty of location of studs 
and holes in the shell its use is limited to the more simple applications. 

5,2.4 Concrete and Wooden Vessels — The technique of fixing backing strips 
to the vessel wall described in 5.2.2 may be used while fixing linings to 
concrete or wooden vessels and some types of joints are shown in Fig. 6, 7 
and 8. Also, in the case of concrete and wooden vessels the backing strips 
can be satisfactorily fixed in position with a 'nail gun', using pins fixed through 
the backing strip into the concrete. Care should be taken to experiment 
with cartridge strength to ensure that the heads of the fixing pins are flush 
with the face of the backing strip. 

5.3 Strip Linmg — - Strip lining can be satisfactorily carried out on welded 
carbon steel vessels. Strips are normally formed to shape to conform to the 
contour of the vessel. The length of the strips is varied to suit local condi- 
tions, for example, if lining is applied in a shop with all normal factory 
facilities available, strips from 600 to 3 000 mm length may be used. How- 
ever, if work is being undertaken in the field the maximum length should 
be reduced to 1 000 mm. The widths of strips vary between 50 and 1 50 mm. 
The narrower widths are used for Unings which operate at high temperatures 
or experience severe thermal cycle. For strip linings in stainless steels 
3 mm thick or less and which are to be operated at elevated temperatures 
the maximum widths recommended are given in Table 3. 
Figure 20 shows four methods of fixing strips, namely: 

a) lap or joggle, 

b) butt strap, 

c) shingle, and 

d) fillet butt. 

30 



IS : 4682 (Part VII) - 1974 

The lap or joggle, butt strap and shingle methods for fixing prevent any 
detrimental effect from weld metal dilution. However, they are much more 
costly in lining material than the fiUet butt method and the covered welds 
in these lapped methods cannot be inspected in service. With the lap or 
joggle method a forming operation is required for the joggled edge, with the 
butt strap method four weld heads are employed for each joint, with the 
shingle method it is difficult to make a proper fit of the lapping edge and 
finally, these lapped linings will not withstand high hydrostatic pressure 
-without a tendency to pull away the lapped weld bead. 

A three-weld bead technique can be used to minimize dilution from 
the shell material. A further precaution against dilution can be achieved 
by the use of higher alloy electrodes than the lining material, for example, 
25/12 chromium-nickel electrodes are often used for intermediate and buffer 
layers while welding stainless steel linings to carbon steel. 

It has been found in special cases where a higher alloy cannot be used, 
such as pure nickel and nickel alloy liners, that the dilution effect in the 
weld can be further reduced by using a five-bead technique for the fillet 
butt joint. 

With the fillet butt method the strips are tack- welded to the shell with 
a gap between 6 mm and 8 mm wide according to the thickness of the lining 
and the position of the wxld, that is, downhand, horizontal or vertical. 
The overriding consideration in fbcing the gap width is to ensure that when 
two adjacent strips have been welded as shown in Fig. 20D the shell is 
completely covered. In this way dilution of subsequent runs of weld with 
shell material is kept to a minimum. 

The method of fixing strips in position on flat or cylindrical smfaces is 
as follows: 

The first strip is applied horizontally to the vessel wall, pressed firmly 

into contact with the wall and tack-welded in position. A number of 

such strips may be tacked at a time if so desired once the required 

spacing has been established. The strips are then welded with one 

or two weld beads all round according to the method sfiown in 

Fig. 20D. The strips arje then tested and inspected and any leaks 

repaired {see 6,2.2). The strips are then thoroughly dried and cleaned 

and subsequent weld beads added according to whether the three- or 

five-weld bead technique has been agreed between the customer and 

the contractor. In manual metal arc welding a slight weaving of the 

top cover bead may be permitted. 

Strip lining can be carried out satisfactorily on the dished, ellipsoidal, 

conical and hemispherical heads commonly used in construction of pressure 

vessels. A suitable method of arranging the lining plates for a dished head 

is as follows: 

As shown in Fig. 18, the surface of the dishing can be considered to be in 
three zones: 

a) the cyhndrical portion designed for direct attachment to the shell, 

31 



IS : 4682 (Part VII) - 1974 

b) the knuckle radius, and 

c) the dished crown. 

The cylindrical zone should be included in the pattern of strips used to 
line the wall of the vessel and this should extend to the tangent line where 
cylinder and knuckle meet. 

The knuckle radius zone is a relatively short radius area and is lined with 
a series of narrow width strips arranged radially. The length of the strip is 
arbitrary but should extend from the tangent line to a point between 50 and 
75 mm beyond the actual intersection points of the knuckle and the dishing 
radius. This should not exceed 300 mm and normally 200 to 250 rnni 
suffices and this gives reasonable flexibility of fit-up. These strips should 
be a combination of rectangular and wedge-shaped pieces. 

The measurements of the wedge-shaped pieces shown in Fig. 18G can be 
determined for any particular size and shape of dished head by comparing 
the periphery of the inside diameter of the dished head with that of the 
diameter of the intersection zones (2) and (3). A suitable measurement 
for T and W-T in Fig. 18G may be chosen and a number of such wedge- 
shaped pieces arrived at. 

For very large heads the use is recommended of one wedge-shaped 
piece to two rectangular pieces while with very small heads two wedges to- 
one rectangular gives a better arrangement. 

Before strip lining starts the tangent line between the straight portion 
and the knuckle radius should be marked on the vessel wall and a circle 
should be scribed showing the extent of the knuckle strips on the dished 
area of the pressing. 

In attaching the strips to this knuckle area an effort should be made to 
keep the long edges of the strips radial and this is easily checked as work 
proceeds. Adjustment can be made from time to time either by using a 
specially cut wedge or by inverting one of the existing wedge pieces. 

The dished zone is lined by using a herringbone pattern of layout and a 
practical sequence for doing this is shown in Fig. 18. The knuckle radius 
zone having been completed at this stage, the ends of the parallel strips 
can be cut to produce a satisfactory fit-up for welding to the knuckle strips. 

As an alternative to lining the knuckle radius and dished crown witli 
strips shaped as described above, equal segments may be used as shown 
in Fig. 19. 

The segm-ents should be arranged radially and should be preformed to 
the correct shape. The width of the segments will be determined by the 
size and shape of the dished head; for large diameter heads it will be found 
necessary to increase the number of knuckle and crown radii segment plates. 

5.4 Weld Metal Overlay — - A layer of corrosion resistant weld metal is 
deposited on the surface of the plate in contact with the corrosive environ- 
ment. This may be carried out by any of the manual, semi-automatic or 

32 



IS : 4682 (Part VII) - 1974 

automatic metal arc processes, generally in a downhand position, using 
round or strip electrodes. 

Cylinders and formed heads are best positioned on suitable manipulators. 
The base metal surface to be layered should be clean and descaled by 
either grit blasting or grinding. Preheat may be applied, where the type 
of base metal and thickness warrants, in order to prevent possible heat 
affected zone defects. 

Due to fusion of the base metal, some dilution of the weld metal occurs in 
the first run. The effect of this, however j may be reduced by depositing a 
layer of over-alloyed material. Diffusion of base metal elements into the 
weld metal is greatly reduced by a second layer and may possibly be eliminat- 
ed at the surface of a third layer. 

Weld metal overlay method of lining is particularly suitable for heavy 
sections. 

€. INSPECTION, TESTING, MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR 

6.1 Inspection 

6.1.1 Quality control of the material and fabricating procedures for 
loose lined, overlayed and clad equipment is very important since failure 
in service may cause irreparable harm. 

Inspection should cover the fabrication of the vessel or equipment to be 
lined, the material to be used, the lining procedure throughout fabrication 
and the lining after completion. 

6.1.2 Quality control procedures should include the following: 

a) The manufacture of the vessel should be to the appropriate speci- 
fication and, where applicable, a pressure test should have been 
carried out unless special dispensation has been obtained. 

b) The internal surface of the vessel should be thoroughly clean and 
free from scale or foreign matter, and all surfaces to be lined should 
be smooth. 

c) AH materials used for the lining or cladding of plates should be to 
the agreed specification and the cladding should be inspected to 
see that it is of uniform thickness and free from faults. 

d) The welder should be tested as detailed in 6.2.1 or, where required, 
in accordance with the requirements of other authorities. 

e) The fit-up lining sheets and strips, the edge preparation and welding 
gaps should be in accordance with the approved procedure and 
the recommendations of this code. 

f) Welder's work after sealing runs as have been laid down should 
be examined for lack of fusion, porosity, cracks, etc. Special care 
should be taken to avoid stray arc striking and spatter on the surface 
of the corrosion resistant lining. 

33 



IS : 4682 (Fart VII) - 1974 

g) When several welders are working on a vessel each operator should 
identify his own work with a symbol (stamping is not permissible) 
so that inspection can relate faulty work to an individual and 
introduce early steps to effect remedy. 

h) Inspection should ensure that no fiUing-in runs of weld are laid 
down on strip lining using the fillet butt technique until all adjoin- 
ing strips have been thoroughly cleaned down, tested and inspected. 

j) On completion of welding the surface of the weld should be brushed 
clean and made free from all welding slag, and examined with 
dye penetrant for any cracks. Particular attention should be paid 
to the inspection of any test holes in the linings that have been 
filled after testing. 

6.2 Welders' Q,uaUfication Tests 

6.2.1 Qualification tests are necessary for each of the welders employed 
on the various welding procedures involved in the construction of the 
vessel. 

Where the outer vessel is built to a specification, for Example, IS : 
2825-1969*, the welders' qualification tests should be in accordance with 
that specification. 

Welders' qualification tests for corrosion and heat resistant metal linings 
or corrosion and heat resistant metal clad materials should take cognizance 
of the method of construction of the vessel. Test welds should be carried 
out under the same conditions and using similar equipment, technique and 
materials of similar type and thickness as those used in the construction 
of the vessel or lining. Where positional welding is involved the various 
positions should be reproduced in the qualification tests. For each type of 
weld detail employed on the construction of the vessel or lining, a simulated 
test weld should be undertaken by each welder to be employed on the 
particular detail. A welder should be given an opportunity to familiarize 
himself with somewhat special techniques required before he as subjected to 
these tests. 

6.2.2 Each test weld should be subjected to : 

a) a visual examination, which should reveal no lack of fusion, imder- 
cutting or cracks in the metal or adjacent material; 

b) macrosectioning and microscopic examination, where appropriate, 
which should show that sound root fusion with the shell material 
is achieved and that the weld is sound and free from porosity; 

c) bend tests, direct, reverse and side, where appropriate; 

d) a dye penetrant examination; 

e) radiography and/or ultra-sonic examination, where appropriate ; and 

f) ferritic determination of the weld metal and a microhardness survey 
of the weld/base metal interface, where appropriate. 



♦Code for unfired pressure vessels. 

34 



IS : 4682 (Part VH) - 1974 

6.2.3 Welders' qualification tests may be omitted by agreement, where the 
welder concerned has passed appropriate tests and has been r^ularly 
employed on welds similar to those in quesdon. 

6.2.4 During the fabrication it may be necessary to rctest welders. 

6.3 Testmg of Vessels 

6.3.1 General — This code covers a variety of types of vessels which may 
be subjected in service to a wide range of conditions. The tests described 
below reflect this variety of circumstances, and it is not necessarily appro- 
priate that all the tests be applied to a particular vessel. The tests are 
basically of two types, those intended to prove the integrity of the vessel 
as a whole and those intended to show that the lining is free from leaks. 
The order in which the tests are to be carried out should be considered 
carefully, both from safety aspects and effect of one test on other tests; 
for example, water trapped in small leaks in a lining following a hydraulic 
pressure test may prevent the leaks being found in a sensitive leak test. 

In vessels operating at temperatures above 100**G it is essential that 
water is not trapped between the lining and the shell, and this is most likely 
to occur diuring testing operations. Where test holes are drilled through 
the vessel walls they should be left as tell-tale holes to show any leak in 
service. They will then serve as vents to release any vapour pressure 
behind the sections of lining during operation should there be any water 
or other volatile liquid included as a result of testing or in the event of a 
leak. 

Where the lining itself is drilled these holes should be efficiently sealed 
after testing. This can be done by either plug welding or by welding a disc 
of lining material over the hole. After grinding pk^ weld, the surfa<:e 
should be flush with lining surface. It may be convenient to pierce and 
extrude the holes in the lining plate when they are 2 nam or thinner to enable 
threads to be cut. This extruded hole can be either hammered flat or ground 
flush before seal welding after testing {see Fig. 21). 

6,3.2 Pressure Test 

6.3.2*1 General — Pressure tests can , serve two purposes, to prove 
that the shell of the vessel is satisfectory for the intended service, and to 
prove the integrity of the lining imder working conditions. In som.e cases 
there are advantages in using separate tests at' difierent times for these 
purposes. The shell should be tested hydratiKcally to the test pressure laid 
down in the specification to which it is made, but it may be convenient to 
carry out this test before work on the lining is complete, or even bdbre 
it is begun, and to prove the lining by a pneumatic or hydraulic test at 
lower pressure (at least working pressure) when the vessel is complete. 
Appropriate precautions should be taken if a pneumatic test is used, and 
such a test should be done only if fabrication operations done after the 

35 



IS: 4682 (Part Vn)- 1974 

main pressure test are such that they do not impair the integrity of the shell. 
The use of a pneumatic test has the advantage that sensitive leak detection 
techniques can be used subsequently. 

63.2*2 Testing of integrally clad vessels — Integrally clad vessels should 
be hydraulically tested to 3ie normal test pressure for the vessel and should 
be left standing under test for 24 to 48 hours. 

Where parts of the vessel, such as branches, are of a lined construction, 
consideration should be given to treating it as a lined vessel. 



TEST HOLE 




EXTRUDED 
TEST HOLE 




LINING 



PLAIN 

DISC OF LINING MATERIAL 
WELDED OVER PLUG 
WELDED TEST HOLE 




PLUG WELD 
SHOULD BE FLUSH 
WITH LINING SURFACE 



Fig. 21 Testing Holes in Linings 
36 



IS : 4682 CPtet VIQ - 1974 

6.3.2.3 Testing of loose lined vessels — The loose lined vessels should be 
pressure tested when complete after test for continuity of the lining. Where 
a prior hydraulic test to the normal test pressure has been done this test 
may be to a lower pressure, at least the working pressure, and may be a 
pneumatic test. 

After a final hydraulic test the vessel should be drained and carefiilly 
dried, and the welds then checked for seepage after whitewashing the 
surface. 

6.3,3 Tests fot Continuity of the Lining 

6.3.3.1 Dye penetrant test — The use of dye penetrants on the seating 
welds is recommended when the lining plates have been plug welded after 
test. Any suspicious areas of dampness showing after hydrostatic whitewash 
test can usefully be rechecked by dye penetrant examination. 

6.3.3.2 Air test — The lining should first be tested by introducing a 
pneumatic pressure between the shell and lining and the welds swabbed 
with soap and water. A pressure of about 35 kPa is adequate to detect 
any leaks and these will show up as a cluster of bubbles. High pressure is 
not an indication of more stringent testing, as the air firom pinholes may 
jet through the soapy water and produce few or no bubbles and hence not 
be detected. There is also a danger of liftii^ and bulging the lining with 
pressures above 50 kPa. 

Air may be introduced by one of the following two methods : 

a) Drilled and tapped holes through the vessel, or 

b) Drilled and tapped holes through the lining plates. 

Another method requires a rubber cup of suitable size and similar in 
shape to a stethoscope which is attached by a rubber tube to a small vacuum 
pump. The rim of the cup is moistened with soap solution, glycerine or 
other viscous liquid so that a seal is formed and the cup moved over the 
surface of the welded seams. Where the weld is sound the cup will either 
collapse under suction or draw air through the sealing liquid, and leaks 
are found where there is jao collapse or drawing in of air. This method is 
particularly suitable for testing or locating leafc in large tanks on site but 
will be successful only when the weld beads are kept flush with the adjoining 
metal. 

A further alternative is to use a vacuum box fitted with a glass top and 
sealed to the vessel by a soft rubber gasket. The surface of the vessel is 
moistened with a soap solution and the box placed over the area to be 
tested, the presence of a leak being shown by formation of bubbles visible 
through the glass top of the vacuum box. It is not necessary to introduce 
air pressure between shell and lining, although the sensitivity is increased 
if this is done. 

A more sensitive test is obtained by introducing air into the vessel itself 
and check*, 'or leakage at vent holes in the shell. Leakage can be detected 

37 



IS :4fi82 (Part VII) - 1974 

by use of soap solutiom, tiltra-somc detectors or by connecting manometers 
or other pressure indicating devices to the vent holes. This technique allows 
use of higher air pressures than can be safely introduced between the shell and 
lining, but can only show the approximate location of a leak, which should be 
located accurately by, for example, dye-penetrant examination of the inner 
suT&ce of the vc^cl or one of the sensitive leak detection jnethods described 
in € J.3.3. 

SJ33J3 Sensitive ieak detection techniques* — A number of techniques can 
be used in which the vessel or the space between shell and lining is pressurized 
widi air containing a small amount of an ^impurity*, the artive agent; 
leaks are detected by devices which arc very sensitive to traces of the active 
agent. The techniques are extremely sensitive, and should be used only 
vfhcn it is impcMrtant to ensure that the integrity of the lining is greater 
than can be established by the methods described in 6.3.3.1 and 6.3.3^^. 
Because the detection elements are :so sensitive, the level of leakage rate 
that is considered significant should be determined by experiment, calculation 
or prim* experience and the techniques should apply only after an air test 
has been done to eliminate major leaks which would contaminate the air 
surrounding or inside the vessel and prevent small leaks being detected. 
The tests are best done by introducing air containing the detection agent into 
the space between shell and lining, and examining the inner surface of the 
vessel for leaks. 

Greater sensitivity can be obtained by pressurizing the vessel and testing 
at vent holes in the shell, as higher pressures can be used, but this method 
does not allow precise location of individual leaks. 

Four basic methods are available, differing in the nature of the imf urity 
and method of detection. In each case a sample of air from the region 
under test is drawn through the sensing element : 

a) The detection agent is a halogen or halogen compoimd, such as 
dichlorofluoromethane, and the sensing element depends on the 
increase in positive ion formation which occurs at a heated platinum 
surface when the halogen content of the surrounding air increases. 

b) The detection agent is hdinm gas, and the sensing element a mass 
spectrometer. 

c) The detection^gent is a radioactive isotope and the sensing element 
is a scintillation counter or other appropriate device. 

d) The detection agent is hydrogen, helium or argon, and the sensing 
element depends on changes in thermal conductivity of air caused 
by the presence of the second gas. 

Suitable precautions against the hazards introduced by the presence of the 
active agents should be taken. 



♦These techniques are special, and few lined vessels will be made for duties where the use 
of such sensitive methods would be justified. 

38 



IS:4e82(PaitVII)-1974 

^.3.4 Testing of Vessels Subject to Arduous Conditions — Additional tests for 
vessels which are to be operated under vacuum conditions or subject to 
thermal and pressure recycling should be considered. 

6.4 ^famte^a&ce and Repair 

6.4.1 Any lined vessel should be placed on a schedule for routine inspection 
for possible failure of the lining, which may be caused by : 

a) corrosion, either general or localized; 

b) erosion by movement of a product in the vicinity of branches; 

c) distortion and ultimate tearing of lining plates due to operational 
stresses; 

d) cracks; and 

e) bulging of the lining due to moisture trapped behind the lining 
during fabrication, expansion of gas, forced behind the lining through 
a pinhole under high pressure, when the high pressure is released, or 
collapse of a loose lining due to inadvertent exposure to vacuum 
conditions. 

6.4.2 When repair entails only the re-welding of the lining plates where a 
fracture has occurred this can be done by simply grinding out the faulty 
weld until the sound shell material is reached and re-welding, using the 
same technique as for strip lining. If, however, the product produces 
conditions injurious to welding and some seepage is apparent behind the 
lining as a result of the fracture, then the lining plates affected should be 
stripped off, the shell thoroughly cleaned and fresh lining plates fitted. 

Localized corrosion, pitting or eroded areas where the penetration has not 
come right through the lining can be repaired by building up with weld 
metal or with further overlaying of more lining plates. In either case the 
surface should be thoroughly cleaned and made of a profile that is acceptable 
to the welder before repair work commences. 

When lining plates have become buckled and distorted they shouldnot be 
hammered back into position. The affected plates should be removed, the 
shell thoroughly cleaned and the area relined. In some instances, where 
lining failure has allowed liquid to seep behind the plates but has been 
detected before extensive corrosion has taken place, it is possible to remove 
the liquid by heating the vessel and lining to a temperature of at least 200°C. 
If this device is resorted to, extreme care should be taken to ensure that all 
moisture and products of corrosion have been removed before the repair is 
effected. 

6.4.3 If tell-tale holes or holes to prevent build-up of gas pressure have 
been incorporated in the shell it is important that the holes are kept open 
and that operating personnel are instructed to report any evidence of a leak 
immediately. 

39 



IS : 4682 (Part VH) - 1974 

APPENDIX A 

{Clause 0.8) 

EXC3IANGE OF INFORMATION 

A-1. Early consultation and exchange of information should take place 
between all parties concerned in the design, manufacture and use of vessels 
and equipment which are intended to have a corrosion resistant lining. 

An accurate detailed drawing, to scale, should be available to all parties 
concerned. 

A-2. These consultations should cover the following : 

a) Construction of equipment or vessel to be lined, including location 
of welds, design of branches and fittings, joints and internal supports 
for any loose equipment to be fitted later; 

b) Nature and concentration of media for which the vessel or equip- 
ment is to be used; 

c) Operating temperature and pressure ranges; 

d) Whether vessel will be subjected to vacuum; 

e) Other factors influencing stresses on Uning, for example, expansion, 
construction, vibration, erosion, etc; 

f) Velocity of contents and abrasive characteristics to be met, 
especially at points of their entry to the vessel; 

g) Means of access (rf Uning materials and installation crew and 
equipment, lifting facilities, etc; 

h) Where existing vessel has been in service on site, details of site 

conditions that may affect this work being carried out in situ; 
j) Safety measures on site; 
k) Existing surface finish of the vessel to be lined, that is, pitting or 

thinning due to corrosion, inclusion of traces of product, etc; 
m) Inspection and testing of the lining and vessel, including welders* 

qualification tests; 
n) Whether the vessel is to be internally or externally heated; 
p) Media other than working media which will be used, for example, 

steam or chemical agent for cleaning; and 
q) Start up and shut down conditions. 



40 



IS :4682 (Part VII) - 197^ 

{Continued from page 2) 

Process Vessels Subcommittee^ EDG 57 : 2 

Convener Representing 

Shri a. p. Rao Bharat Heavy Plate and Vessels Ltd, Visakha- 

patnam 

Members 

Shri C. Babu Rao {Alternate to 
Shri A. P. Rao) 
Shri B. R. Bhattacharjee The A. P. V. Engineering Go Private Ltd, 

Calcutta 

Shri B. Banerjee {Alternate) 
Shri N. K. Buzruk National Chemical Laboratory (GSIR), Poona 

Shri R. Sadagopa Chari Burmah-Shell Refineries Ltd, Bonibay 

Shri S. L. Aranha {Alternate) 
Shri R. S. Grover The Ralph M. Parsons Go of Asia, Bombay 

Shri P. V. S. Namboothiripad {Alternate) 
Shri S. Ghosh L C. I. (India) Private Ltd, Calcutta 

Dr S, K. Ghanda {Alternate) 
Dr Asghar Husain Regional Research Laboratory, Hyderabad 

Shri H. Shripati Rao {Alternate) 
Shri H. H. Jethanandani The Fertilizer Corporation of India Ltd, Distt 

Dhanbad 
Dr O. P. Kharbanda Larsen & Toubro Limited, Bombay 

Shri P. M. Mehta {Alternate) 
Dr M. G. Krishna Indian Institute of Petroleum, Dehra Dun 

Shri H. K. Mulchandani {Alternate) 
Shri P. K. Pai Esso Standard and Refining Co of India Ltd, 

Bombay . 
Shri V, M. Rao The K. C. P. Ltd, Madras 

Shri K. Sambasiva Rao {Alternate) 
Dr D. C. Tapadar Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi 

Dr D. S. Viswanath Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 



41 



