**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



IS 13082-2 (1991) : Bulk handling equipment - Ship unloader 
- Gantry mounted grab type - Code of practice for design, 
manufacture and erection, Part 2 Electro-mechanical 
requirements [MED 7 : Material Handling Systems and 
Equipment] 



re^y / 1 juaaaws^fea is^am^? 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR TJ^ ^TT teMHI | ^t ^Wt ^^PTT ^f ^TT ^T^?TT \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



. ■■ * v - A j- IS 13082 ( Part 2) :1991 

_ (Reaffirmed 2001) 

Indian Standard 

BULK HANDLING EQUIPMENT — 
SHIP UNLOADER — GANTRY MOUNTED 
GRAB TYPE - CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 
DESIGN, MANUFACTURE AND ERECTION 

PART 2 ELECTRO-MECHANICAL REQUIREMENTS 



UDC 621 , 869'2:62912606 , 76 



© BIS 1991 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 

May 1991 Price Gronp 2 



Bulk Handling Equipment Sectional Committee, HMD 07 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Bulk Handling Equipment Sectioral Committee had been approved by the Heavy Mechanical 
Engineering Division Council. 

There are various types of ship ur loaders but, main types being continuous and grab type. These 
could be mounted on the gantry or crawler/tyres. 

Ship unloaders are important functional sub-system of unloading and transportation of bulk 
materials shipped. 

This Part 2 is the one in the series of other parts of the standard covering the code of practice 
for design, manufacture and erection of gantry mounted grab type ship unloader provided with 
horizontal boom and grab-bucket. Other parts of the standard are: 

IS 13082 ( Part 1 ) : 1991 Mecharical and structural requirements 

IS 13082 ( Part 3 ) : 1991 Information to be supplied by the purchaser and the manufacturer 

The requirements given in this standard are for guidelines and notwithstanding the requirements 
to be fulfilled by the purchasers and the manufacturers in accordance with any Statutory Acts, 
Rules, Regulations or otherwise specified by other Authorities. 

This standard is expected to provide uniform practice to be adopted by the purchasers and the 
manufacturers of such ship unloaders. 

For structural requirements of ship unloaders a reference may be made to Indian Standard Bulk 
handling equipment — Mobile continuous type — Rules for the design of structures ( under 
preparation ). 

In the preparation of this standard, reference was made to the publication on Heavy Lifting 
Appliances — Rules for the Design of Hoisting Appliances by Federation Europeenne De La 
Manutention. 



IS 13082 ( Part 2 ) : 1991 



Indian Standard 



BULK HANDLING EQUIPMENT — 

SHIP UNLOADER — GANTRY MOUNTED 

GRAB TYPE — CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 

DESIGN, MANUFACTURE AND ERECTION 



PART 2 ELECTRO-MECHANICAL REQUIREMENTS 



1 SCOPE 



1,1 This Indian Standard covers electro-mecha- 
nical requirements, inspection and testing re- 
quirements relating to the design, manufacture, 
and erection of gantry mounted grab type ship 
unloader provided with horizontal boom and 
grab-bucket. 

2 GENERAL 

2,1 The unloader shall be complete with all 
electrical accessories required for its safe, 
smooth and efficient operation. 



2.2 Only non-hygroscopic 
used for insulation. 



materials shall be 



Offered shall be suitable 
system fault level at that 



2-3 Electrical system 
for the power supply 
point. 

2.4 Electrical installation work shall be carried 
out through licensed electrical contractors, 
holding valid contractor's licences issued by the 
concerned Statutory Authority. 

3 ENCLOSURES 

3.1 All electrical equipments shall be properly 
enclosed or protected to suit the environmental 
conditions and to prevent inadvertent or 
accidental contact. 

3.2 All enclosures shall preferably be of cast 
iron, or cast aluminium; wherever sheet steel 
has to be used, the thickness of the metal shall 
not be less than 2 mm. 

3.2.1 All joints in enclosures shall be made 
dust-proof by gaskets of high quality non- 
deteriorating rubber or other suitable material; 

3.3 Bare conductors, if used as bus wires, shall 
be located so as to prevent any form of acci- 
dental contact. The execution shall ensure 
complete safety and wherever necessary metallic 
screens shall be employed, 

3.4 Flame proof/increased safety enclosures 
shall be provided for electrical equipments 
wherever required. 

3.5 Wherever it is necessary for an electrical 
equipment to be adjusted or inspected while in 
service, necessary clearances from live parts may 
be provided to ensure safety in operation. 



3.6 All enclosures of electrical equipments shall 
be given two coats of anti-corrosive epoxy paint 
over two coats of primer suitable for epoxy. 

3.7 Various control gears like contactors, 
relays, control transformers, etc, shall be housed 
in dust proof, damp proof and vermin proof 
protective panels having doors interlocked with 
the supply control switches. Space heaters shall 
be provided for the panels. 

4 POWER SUPPLY ARRANGEMENTS 

4.1 Power supply shall be controlled by a 
shore-based circuit breaker on the wharf, from 
which power shall be taken to the unloader 
through suitable collector systems like spring- 
loaded motor operated cable reeling drum 
etc. 

4.2 It shall be possible to trip the shore-based 
circuit breaker from the machinery house of the 
unloader. 

4.3 Circuit breaker to isolate the main supply 
to the unloader shall be provided in the machi- 
nery house. It shall be possible to switch off 
this breaker from the operator's cabin also. 

4.4 A plug and socket arrangement shall be 
provided at the shore circuit breaker to connect 
up the unloader's current collecting arrangements 
( power and control ). 

4.4.1 The plug and socket for power shall 
interlock so that the plug shall be withdrawn 
only when the circu ; t breaker is 'OFF'. 

4.5 External control links shall be taken out of 
the unloader using a current collection system 
similar to that for power. This system may 
carry the communication links also. 

5 POWER TRANSFORMERS 

5.1 Power transformers if provided shill be dry 
type. These shall have overload, voltage and 
temperature protection. 

6 MOTORS 

6.1 To select a motor the follow : ng shall be 
established: 

a) The maximum torque required to produce 
motion in the most unfavourable case. 



1 



IS 13082 ( Part 2 ) : 1991 



b) That it shall allow the unloader to 
perform its normal duty without abnormal 
wear. 

6.2 A/C motors shall be of totally enclosed, 
fan-cooled, weather protected, hose-proof design 
( IP-55 degree of protection ) with at least 
class B insulation and shall be suitable for crane 
duty. 

6.2-1 A/C motors shall have thermistor, overload 
and short circuit protection. 

6.3 D/C motors shall have at least IP-23 enclosure 
and shall be housed indoor. 

6.4 The motors shall have at least the following 
cyclic duty factors: 



Grab hoisting/closing 
Trolley travel 
Other motions 



60 percent 
60 percent 
40 percent 



6.4.1 Motors shall have built-in thermistors with 
alarm, and also space heater elements. 

6.5 Thyristor drives if provided shall have 
current limitation, speed limitation, overload 
protection, short-circuit protection and fuse 
protection. 

7 RESISTORS 

7.1 Resistors if provided shall be intermittent- 
rated for Class IV duty and shall be suitable for 
the climatic conditions and the corrosive 
atmosphere described elsewhere. Stainless steel 
resistance grids are preferred. 

8 BRAKES 

8.1 Electro-mechanical/electro-hydraulic brakes 
of adequate capacity shall be provided for all 
motions/motors, in addition to emergency brakes 
for hoist hold, and hydraulic rail clampers. All 
brakes shall be of fail-safe type. Smooth braking 
shall be ensured for hoisting and trolley travel. 

9 CABLES 

9.1 All power cables shall be PVC insulated, 
armoured and PVC sheathed preferably with 
copper conductor. All control cables shall be 
2*5 mm 2 copper. 

9.2 Power and control cables shall be protected 
with HRC fuses/circuit breakers. 

9.3 The sizes of the cables shall be so chosen 
that they are rated to carry the full load current 
continuously after allowing for necessary de- 
rating factors for the conditions of installation, 
and also so that the voltage drop in cables shall 
not exceed 2*5 percent during running. 

9.4 All cables shall be neatly clamped at 
suitable intervals. All fixing materials shall be 
given suitable anti-corrosive paint. 

9.5 All cables shall be terminated by suitable 
cable glands. 



9.6 Metallic conduits shall be provided wherever 
necessary for the protection of the cables. 

9.7 Power and control circuits to the cab shall 
be by a festoon cable system. 

9.8 Electrical circuits may be printed/painted/ 
pasted at the inside of control cable covers. 

10 EARTHING 

10.1 The unloader shall be earthed through 
shoes rubbing on the rails. In addition, the 
correction between the shore-based circuit 
breaker ard the unloader shall have a fourth 
conductor to be used as an earth connection. 
This earth connection shall be linked to the earth 
connection of the shore-based circuit breaker. 

10.2 Double earthing shall be provided for all 
equipments. 

11 LIGHTING 

11.1 The unloader shall be provided with 
suitable illumination to ensure good lighting 
at all places. 

11.2 Flood lights shall b2 provided at the 
following points: 

a) On the apron for the operator to see the 
bucket operation during the night. 

b) In front and rear portions of the unloader 
to properly light the tracks during 
unloader travel in the night. 

11.3 All lighting circuits shall be protected with 
HRC fuses and shall be controlled by one main 
switch-fuse in addition to separate circuit control 
switches. 

11-4 Battery operated emergency lights shall be 
provided at strategic locations. These shall be 
the automatic typw. The light shall automati- 
cally come 'ON' when normal power supply 
fails and shall go 'OFF' automatically when 
normal supply comes back. The unit shall in- 
corporate a trickle charger for keeping the 
battery on charge. The battery shall b^ rated 
for at least 30 minutes. 

11.5 Air-craft warning/obstruction lights shall 
be provided on the unloader if required by any 
Statutory Authorities, for which separate 
battery units ( one hour rated ) with chargers 
shall be provided. 

11.6 All light fittings shall be mounted on shock 
absorbers. 

11.7 Low voltage plug socket outlets, with hand 
lamps and sufficient lengths of cables, shall be 
provided. 

12 CONTROLS 

12.1 A safe low voltage shall be employed for 
the controls. This shall be from the secondary 
winding of an isolating transformer; one terminal 



IS 13082 ( Part 2 ) : 1991 



of this supply shall be earthed and the contactor 
and the relay coils shall be connected to this 
terminal. 

13 INTERLOCKS 

13-1 Necessary interlocks for the safe ^ and 
smooth operation of the unloader shall be 
provided. 

13.2 'Forward' and 'Reverse' contactors shall 
be interlocked electrically, and preferably 
mechanically as well. 

14 OPERATOR'S CABIN 

14.1 Operator's cabin with all necessary controls 
for performing the various operations shall be 
located in such a manner as to ensure complete 
view of the operations. 

14.2 Control facilities for the following are 
recommended to be provided in the operator's 
cabin: 

a) Unloader travel — ( additional facility 
shall be provided to carry out operation 
from the wharf also ), 

b) Trolley travel, 

c) Bucket operation, 

d) Cab positioning, 

e) Belt feeder operation, 

f ) Cab lighting, 

g) Dust collection equipments!, and 

h) An emergency stop button to switch 'OFF* 
all unloader motions. This shall not 
interrupt power to the auxiliary circuits, 
lighting, signals, etc. 

14.3 Indication and alarm for main supply, 
control supply, motions, wind pressure, phase 
failure, etc. 

14.4 The cab shall bs fully insulated and shall 
be equipped with wall-mounted electric motor- 
driven ventilating fan with gravity type louvres 
and air filtration arrangement, to ensure 
sufficient number of changes per hour. 

14.5 Wirdows shall be tinted and shall be 
arranged to give the operator an unobstructed 
view of the bucket operation between the hold 
of the ship and the gantry hopper. Electrically 
operated wipers for the glass windows snail be 
furnished to improve visibility during rains. 

14.6 There shall be a signal horn controlled 
from the operator's cabin. 

15 PROTECTION 

15.1 In case of excessive wind pressure, an alarm 
shall sound and all motions shall be cut off 



and the unloader shall get clamped to rails 
hydraulically. 

15.2 Shunt and series limit switches shall be 
provided for all motions. The shunt switch 
shall operate first and if the motion fails to stop, 
series limit shall act. Additional limit switches 
shall be provided for long travel, trolley travel, 
cabin travel, etc. 

15.2.1 Instead of shunt and series limit switches, 
mechanical type end-limit switches and magnetic 
type pre-limit switches may b? provided. The 
pre-limit switch shall act first to trip the motor 
and apply mechanical brakes. On reaching the 
end-limit switch, the breaker on the secondary 
side of the transformer shall gst tripped. For 
the troiiey an additional pre-limit switch shall 
be provided ahead of the two limit switches 
mentioned above. 

15.3 Phase failure relay shall be provided to 
trip the main circuit breaker. 

15.4 Smoke detector, operation counter, etc, 
shall be provided. 

15.5 A warning bell shall sound automatically 
during long-travel operation. 

16 AIR CONDITIONING 

16.1 In the interest of long life and reliable 
operation, electronic components and other 
components sensitive to temperature, humidity 
and dust, shall preferably bs located in air 
conditioned space(s). 

17 PRESSURISING 

17.1 The electrical machinery house shall be 
pressurised to keep dust away. The pressure 
inside shall be 2 mm by water gauge. Air 
charges per hour shall be 30. 

18 LIFT 

18.1 An electrically operated lift is recom- 
mended. 



19 COMMUNICATION FACILITIES 

19.1 Inter-communication facility within 
unloader structure is recommended. 

20 AUTOMATION 



the 



20.1 Where considered essential, semi-automa- 
tion may be provided to reduce physical and 
psychological stress on the unloader operator. 
Semi-automation may cover all operations of 
the grab and the trolley, but not operations 
inside the hatch. There shall be facility to over- 
side the automatic system at any time. 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on 
products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced 
to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, 
testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the pro- 
ducer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to 
that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use 
of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from 
the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of 
goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in 
any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in 
the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or 
grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publication ), BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, 
are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in 
possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent 
to BIS giving the following reference : 

Doc : No. HMD 07 ( 5227 ) 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters ; 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 

Regional Offices : 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola 
CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 
BOMBAY 400093 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
( Common to all Offices ) 

Telephone 

f 331 01 31 
1 331 13 73 



37 86 62 
53 38 43 

41 29 16 

6 32 92 93 



Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 
COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at Swatantra Bharat Press,]Delhl, India 



