**************** 



^ tOTH: 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 



Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
"Step Out From the Old to the New" ' 



IS 3023 (1965) : Recommended practice for building up by 
metal spraying [MTD 12: Welding Applications] 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 




Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 





BLANK PAGE 




^*-:gv 




^^35^* 



PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



1S:3«23-1965 

( Reaffirmed 1998) 



Indian Standurd 

RECOAOIENDED PRACTICE FOR 
Rlin,DTNG-UP BY METAL SPRAYING 



UDC 621 -793 




^ Cefiyright 1951V bj 
INDIAN STANDAEDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK IHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAR ZAfAR MARC 

NEW DELHI I 






-^V l%5 



15:3023-1965 

Indian Standard 

RECOMMENDED PRACTICE FOR 

BUILDING-UP BY METALSPRAYING 

Welding General Sectional Committee, SMDC 14 

Chairman Representing 

Shri R. Ghosh Indian Oxygen Ltd., Calcutta 

M embers 

Shri K. D. Agahwal Directorate of Teclinical Development ( CGDP ) 

M i ni stry of Defence, N ew Del hi 

Shri M. M. Gupta ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. K. Ahluwalia Stewarts & Lloyds of I ndia Private Ltd., Calcutta 

Shri M. M. Ghosh ( Alternate ) 
Shri F. V. Badami Directorate General of Technical Development 

Sari N. C. Bagohi National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri D. P. Chatterj ee Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals (Ins- 

pection Wing ), New Delhi 
Shei K. C. Choudhubi Ministry of Railways 

Shbi D. S. Nagesh Rao ( Alternate I ) 

Shri N. V. Pandit (Alternate II ) 
Shri B. N. Das National Metallurgical Laboratory (CSIR), 

J amshedpur 
Shri K. C.J ERATH Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters 

Shri J.N. Malik {Alternate) 
ShriM. Mitra Asiatic Oxygen & Acetylene Co. Ltd., Calcutta 

Shri T. Biswas ( Alternate ) 
SHRI J.A. MuLiYiL Indian Oxygen Ltd., Calcutta 

Shri S. V. Sambamubti ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. V. Nadkarni J. B. Advani-Oerl ikon Electrodes ( Private ) Ltd., 

Bombay 

Shri P. S. Visvanath (Alternate ) 
Shri S. K. Pathak Braithwaite & Co. ( India ) Ltd., Calcutta 

Shri K. G. K. Rao Tata Engineering & Locomotive Co. Ltd., J amshedpur 

SHRI S. C. Roy Central Boilers Board, New Delhi 

Sari S. Shanmugasundaram , Public Works Department, Madras 

Shri J . P. Sincla \Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 

Shr] a. K. S. Rao {Alternate} 
Shki T. N. Velu Hindustan Shipyard Ltd., Visakhapatnam 

Shri B. S. Krishnamachar, Director, I SI ( fx-o^cio M ember ) 

Deputy Director ( S & M ) ( Secretary ) 

Panel for Code of Practice for Building-up by Metal 
Spraying, SMDC 14/P-ll 

Shri S. V. Sambamurti Indian Oxygen Ltd., Calcutta 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADtTR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 1 



IS : 3023 . 1965 

Indian Standard 

RECOMMENDEDPRACTICEFOR 
BUILDING-UP BY METAL SPRAYING 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by tine Indian Standards Institution 
on 8 February 1965, after the draft finalized by the Welding General 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Structural and Metals 
Division Council. 

0.2 There are two major fields in which sprayed metal coatings find appli- 
cation, namely, for providing protection to surfaces against corrosion and 
for building-up surfaces to desired dimensions. In this standard, it is inten- 
ded to deal only with the latter aspect. 

0.3 A variety of processes and equipments for flame spraying of metal 
coatings are in use today and some of the recent technical developments 
such as electric arc spraying and plasma arc spraying show much promise. 

0.3.1 This standard, however, covers only the oxy-fuel gas flame spray- 
ing process using metal in the wire form, since this method is by far the 
most commonly used and sufficient information and experience is available 
for the formulation of a code of practice. 

0.4 In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to 
international co-ordination among the standards and practices prevailing 
in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field 
in this country. This has been met by basing the standard on the follow- 
ing publications: 

AWS/G2.4- 55r Recommended practices for metallizing ( Part ID). 
American Welding Society. 

AWS/C 2.1 - 60 Recommended practices for metallizing shafts or 
similar objects ( Part I A). American Welding Society. 

0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, express- 
ing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS: 2- 1960". The number of significant places retained in the rounded 
off value should be t,he same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revistd). 



15:3023-1965 



1. SCOPE 



1.1 This standard covers recommendations for building-up by metal spray- 
ing using wire and oxy-fuel equipment except and where otherwise stated, 
the reference is to building-up of the outside surface of the cylindrical 
components, such as, shafts, rolls, drums, etc, which in fact constitute the 
bulk of the building up applications for which this process is employed. 

2. SURFACE PREPARATION 

2.0 The adherence of the flame sprayed coating to the base depends upon 
mechanical interlocking of the first layer to the interstices of the roughened 
surface or to the bond coat.- For obtaining a high degree of adhesion, 
careful attention should be paid to the preparation of the surface. 

2.1 Cleaning Prior to Further Preparation — Crease, paint and other 
foreign matter shall be removed from the area to be sprayed as well as the 
adjoining area, since these stand in the way of proper adhesion of the 
sprayed metal to the surface. 

2.1.1 A chemical solvent, such as, trichloroethylene or carbon tetrachlo- 
ride or heating or a combination of both methods should be employed for 
cleaning the surface. Surfaces which are likely to have absorbed oil 
should be heated to 250" to 300°C to ensure removal of all traces of oil. 

2.1.2 Blasting with abrasive material is an effective method of removing 
ail foreign matter except oil and grease. 

2.2 Inspection for Soundness -The surface should be carefully 
examined for freedom from cracks and other flaws which would render the 
component unsuitable for repair. 

2.3 Undercutting — It is almost always necessary to undercut the surface 
to be built-up. This is done in order to allow for an adequate and uniform 
thickness of sprayed deposit on the finished job. Undercutting will not be 
necessary when a thin coating of molybdenum is to be applied for restoring 
a component to a size so that a gear, flange, wheel, or such other parts 
may be press-fitted. 

2.3.1 Procedure for Undercutting — The undercutting is accomplished on a 
lathe or similar device by either machining or grinding to the required 
dimensions, care beirfg excercised to see that the undercut section is con- 
centric with the original axis of the shaft. 

2.3.1.1 In cases where the extent of wear that has already taken place 
is such as to allow for an adequate thickness of sprayed deposit in the 
finished job, machining or grinding should be done solely for the purpose of 
correcting the eccentricity in wear. 

2.3.1.2 Undercutting reduces the effective cross-section of the part to be 
metal sprayed. Since sprayed metal deposits do not restore any qualities 



IS: 3023 -1965 

such as tensile strength or resistance to fatigue stress, all parts to be built- 
up by metal spraying should be examined carefully from a design stand- 
point to deta'mine that adequate strength is maintained in the part as 
prepared for metal spraying. 

2.3.1.3 The undercutting operation should preferably be done dry, 
but where this is notfeasible, thisshould be followed by afurther degreas- 
ing treatment and drying. 

2.3.2 Length of Undercut -The length of the undercut section should 
generally extend beyond both-ends of the slea/e, bearing or packing gland 
in which the shaft operates. 

2.3.3 Depth of Undercut-The depth to which the shaft should be under- 
cut is determined by a number of factors such as the diameter of the shaft, 
the severity of service and the amount of wear to be expected in service. ' 
The wear allowance should always be determined for each individual job 
but the information provided in Table 1 may be used for guidance in de 
termining the depth of undercut to be provided for specific service appli- 
cations. Additional allowances should be made, if necessary, for more 
severe wear. 



TABLE 1 RECOMMENDED DEPTH OF UNDERCUT 

( All dimensions in millimetres ) v 

Diameter of Shaft Depth of Undercut on Radius for Various 







Types of Service 






Cl%s A* 


Class Bt 


Class C| 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


Under 25 


— 


0.50 


0-25 


25 tD 50 


I -00 


0-80 


0-25 


50 to 100 


1-25 


1.00 


0.50 


100 to 150 


1.50 


1.25 


0-50 


Over 150 


1-75 


1.50 


0-50 



Note — All Classes of Service — When the molybdenum underlay method is employed, 
no minimum thiclcness is required for press fits, but where wearing surfaces are con- 
cerned, the thicl<ness shall be such thatthe maximum allowablewear will belessthan 
the coating thiclcness. 

*For shafts and journals operating under a heavy bearing load, such as diesel engine 
cranl<shafts or rolling mill journals; for pump sleeves, piston rods and hydraulic rams 
subject to severe service and high pressure, where a maximum safety factor is required. 

fFor normal duty lubricated bearing service; for standard pressure pump rods and 
sleeves; where a normal safety factor is required. 

|For restoring a shaft to size where a gear, flange, wheel or other part is pressed on and 
the sprayed surface does not act as a beari ng. 



18:3023-1965 

2.3.4 Ends o/' Undercut — The sprayed metal requires to be mechanically 
anchored into the base metal at the ends of the undercut sectitiwn. Dove- 
tailing the shoulders at the extremities of the undercut section with a 
radius at the bottom (see Fig. 1 ) is recommended for this purpose. 



15 TO 20 



DEPTH OF UNDERCUT 
{S«e Tabic I) 




R=0-A0TO 0-50mm 



Fig, 1 Method or Pbeparing Shoulders of Undercut Section 



2.3.5 When preparing journals of crankshafts where dovetailing at the 
extremities as illustrated in Fig. lis not permissible, about 0-25 mm should 
be removed from the flanges. The fillet radius should be reduced to be 
parallel to the original radius. 

2.3.6 Where the surface to be built-up extends to the extremity of the 
shaft, the end should be chamfered to avoid possibilities of damage to the 
coating at that point. It is also good practice to chamfer the ends of 
hydraulic rams and pump-rods so that the sprayed deposit can be taken 
over the end surfaces. This prevents the possibility of the pressurized 
fluids exerting a lifting action on the coating under conditions of service. 

2.3.7lf a chamfer at the end is inadmissible, oneof the methods illustra- 
ted in Fig. 2 should be employed. 

2.3.8 All sharp edges in the area to be sprayed, such as edges of oil 
holes and keyways should also be chamfered with 30 degree bevel to a 
depth of approximately 0-5 to 0-8 mm. 



3-2 TO 6-3 mm - 



WELD 




6-3 mm 



R=CW.O TO 0-50 mm —//j 



15 TO 20 



3-2 TO 6'3mm- 



^SHHINR FIT 
/ COtLAR 



2 A Bead Weld Method 



2 B Collar Method 



Fig. 2 Alternative Methods or Pkepabatioi*' where Built-up Sbotiom 
ExTENDSTO End of Shaft 



IS : 3023 - 1965 

2.4 Surface Roughening-To ensure adherence of the sprayed metal, 
a clean surface of sufficient roughness is necessary. Before the roughening 
operation is commenced, however, it should be made certain that all traces 
of oil, grease and other foreign matter on and adjacent to the undercut 
surface are removed. 

A number of methods of roughening are available and the choice 
among them depends mainly on the materials and tools available and 
service requirements. 

2.4.1 Mechanical Roughening — The roughening methods falling under 
mechanical roughening are given in 2.4.1.1 to 2.4.1.3. 

2.4.1.1 Rough threading method-The object of the rough threading 
method is to obtain roughened V threads with the sides torn and jagged 
and with a radius of not more than 0'4 mm at the bottom. A 50" to 60° 
pointed tool should be used for the purpose and Fig. 3 illustrates one of 
the many ways to grind the tool bit for rough threading. Another way is 
to grind the tool so that it has a zero or slightly negative back rake and 
side rake. 




Fig. 3 Method of Grinding Tool Bit fob Rough Threading 



The tool should be set slightly below the centre line of the work to 
give a certain amount of chatter. Alternatively, a shim placed at the back 
of the tool assists in obtaining as rough and jagged a thread as possible. 
The tool should also be fed to a greater depth than normal so as to obtain 
a sharp thread. The work should be rotated at a low speed and 6 to 12 
threads/ cm with a depth of 0'5 to 0-8 mm are to be cut, larger diameter 
shafts usually requiring coarser threads which would be correspondingly 
deeper also. 

The threading operation may be done in one or more passes or cuts. 
No coolant should be used and the surface should always be kept free from 
grease. 

Barbs that are just above the contour of the shaft may be removed by 
placing a flat tool just clear of the job. 

6 



IS: 3023 ^1965 

2.4.1.2 Groove and knurl method — This method consists of cutting spiral 
or' annular grooves in the undercut section in such a manner that the lands 
between them could be knurled subsequently with a special tool to give a 
dovetail effect. 

The cutting of spiral or annular grooves as shown in Fig. 4A is 
accomplished with a round nosed cutting tool ground to the shape and 
dimensions shown in Fig. 5. Spiral grooves of the proper pitch may be 
obtained by setting the thread feed on the lathe at 6 threads per centimetre. 



0-65 TO 0-90mm 
— 1-25 mm 
-HK-0'50m-m 



0-65 




y 



WIDTH OF TOPS AND 
RIDGES NOW EAQUAL- 



20 MAX^ 



RADIUS AT BOTTOM OF 
GROOVE NOT OVER 0'50 mn* 
SIDES OF GROOVES 
STRAIGHT AT TOP 




AFTERKNURLING 



-FIRST FEW PASSES 
IN THIS DIRECTION 



4A Method of Making Spiral Grooves 4B Method of Knuriing 

Fia. 4 Details of Groove and Knurl Method of Preparation 



1-25mm 



3-2 mm 



d. 



-NOT OVER 0.50 mm 
RADIUS AT CORNER 



Fig. 5 Grooving To o l 



In the case of annular grooves the machining time may be reduced 
by the use of multiplecutters which permit the making of several grooves 
at a time. Annular grooves should be cut proceeding from both ends 
towards the centre so that an outsize groove or land, if it occurs, is in the 
centre of the area to be sprayed. The depth of the groove should be 
approximately 0.6 mm and may be cut in one or several passes. The 
grooves should be so spaced that the lands between them are approxi- 
mately 0.4 mm wide. The grooving should cover entire length of the 
undercut section except for 0.6 to 0.9 mm at each end. 



15:9023.1965 

After the grooving is completed, the spreading and roughening 
operation should bedonewith a special knurling tool usually consisting of 
several hardened and grooved wheels. With the work turning at a surface 
speed of from 60 to 90 m/ min, the tool should be fed into the work at 
0-1 mm infeed per pass and traversed over the lands of the grooves at a 
feed of about 0-5 mm per revolution. This operation should be continued 
until the land is spread out and the land width and the groove width are 
approximately 0-8 mm. When this operation has been completed the U 
shaped grooves will have been converted into a series of dovetails. The 
surface of the I and will bespread and roughened ( Fig. 4B ). 

2.4.1.3Blastingwithabrasiveitiaterial — This method is used in certain 
instances where [ a) the rough threading and (b) the grooving and 
knurling preparations cannot be adopted because of the nature of the 
component, a typical example being the journal of a crankshaft. Blasting 
should bedonewith angular grit particles having grain size varying from 
Q-70tol-70 mm, crushed fused alumina (aluminous abrasive ) or clean, 
sharp, crushed chilled iron grit being particularly suitable. 

The most common method of blasting surfaces prior to building-up 
by metal spraying is the pressure method in which the grit is fed from a 
machine where the abrasive is kept under pressure into a jet of compressed 
air which propels theabrasive particles on tothesurfaceata high velocity. 
Pressures used range from 2-5kg/cm2to 7kg/cnif, the higher pressures 
in the range being used for treating the comparatively hard materials. 

It is necessary that the compressed air used as the propellent should 
be free from moisture and traces of oil which adversely affect the bond 
between the sprayed coating and the base. Portions adjacent to the area 
to be treated which need to be protected from the grit should be heavily 
wrapped with rubber tape Oil holes on the surface to be blasted should 
be plugged. Moulded rubber is best for the purpose and these plugsshould 
be capable of withdrawal outwards after grit blasting and spraying. 

Blasting as a method of preparation is not suitable in cases where the 
applied metal coating is subject to severe torsional stress. 

2.4.2 Electric Bonding -When the surface is too hard to be grit blasted 
or machined according to the methods described under 2.4.1.1 and 2.4.1.2, 
it may be roughened by electric bonding in which spattering with a low 
power welding set using a bundle of nickel wires as electrodes leaves small, 
irregularly shaped particles of the electrodes on the surface which is, as a 
result, roughened. 

Special equipment is required for this type of preparation and for 
details of the working of this method, reference should be made to 
technical literature available on the subject from the manufacturers of the 
equipment. 

8 



IS: 3023 -1965 

This process which is slow in application is little used except for the 
treatment of hardened or irregular surfaces. 

2.4.3 Molybdenum Underlay — While this method may be adopted for 
general use also, it is particularly useful in treating hardened surfaces 
which cannot be prepared by the methods described under 2.4.1.1, 2.4.1.2 
and 2.4.1.3. It consists of applying by [metal spraying a thin coating of 
molybdenum on to the surface which should be clean, free from grease and 
slightly roughened or abrasing with medium grade emery cloth, taking a 
light grinding cut or light grit blasting being usudlly adequate. Grit 
blasting Is definitely of benefit in that it produces compressive stresses in 
the surface of the steel and offsets the tendency to the lowering of the 
fatigue strength. The molybdenum coating acts as the base for the coating 
that follows the metal to be used for building-up. 

When used as a bonding coat, the thickness of the molybdenum should 
only be sufficient to cover the surface completely. This will be equal to 
an average coating thickness of 0-04 to 0*05 mm, which will then measure 
0"07 to 0'08 mm due to surface irregularities. The underlay coating should 
be sprayed coarse since such a coating provides a better key for the 
following coat. The correct degree of atomisation may be achieved by 
reducing the propellent air pressure to less than the usual figure 
recommended for normal spraying of other metals and alloys. 

It is essential that acetylene be used as the fuel gas ibr spraying 
molybdenum. Adjustment of both the acetylene and oxygen pressures is 
critical Molybdenum will oxidise badly and not bond if even a slight 
excess of oxygen is used. Conditions of spraying molybdenum involving 
high oxygen gas ratios are confined to the application of hardened 
molybdenum coatings and are not used for underlays. The operating 
conditions recommended by the manufacturers of the metal spraying 
equipment should be carefully followed. 

Since molybdenum sticks even to smooth surfaces, it is necessary to 
mask areas adjacent to the portion to be treated with tape or a masking 
compound. Oil holes in the area to be treated should be protected by the 
uSe of carbon, wood or brass plugs and keyways by inserting a brass, 
bronze or carbon dummy key. 

A molybdenum coat when applied correctly on a freshly prepared 
surface will adhere satisfactorily to steel either in the hardened or in the 
soft state, cast iron, stainless steel, nickel and nickel alloys and most alu- 
minium and magnesium alloys. It does not bond well with copper and 
copper alloys and on nitrided steel." Molybdenum has a marked tendency 
to oxidization at elevated temperatures and because of the danger of 
deterioration of the bond on account of this, a molybdenum underlay is 
not generally recommended for work which will be subjected to 
temperatures over 320°C. 



IS: 3023- 1965 

3. SPRAYING 

3.1 General- Parts should be sprayed as 'soon as possible after 
preparation. Where, for special reasons, the spraying has to be delayed 
for even a short period of time or the part has to be handled, the prepared 
surface should be protected from oxidation and contamination. Wrapping 
with clean paper and handling with clean protective gloves usually pro- 
vides adequate protection. Since condensation of moisture on the prepared 
surface impedes satisfactory adhesion of the sprayed metal, warming the 
surface prior to spraying is recommended but if a gas flame is used care 
has to be taken to ensure that surface oxidation and contamination do not 
occur in the process. Oil holes and keyways on the surface to be treated 
should be plugged with moulded rubber or carbon insets. 

When spraying steel and other metals, particularly molybdenum, the 
bright spray is liable to strain the eyes of the operator and he should, 
therefore, be provided with tinted glasses of the right shade and quality 
(see IS: 1802- 1961*). 

When spraying large quantities of metals of the copper group and 
nickel, it will be necessary for the operator to protect the nose and mouth 
by means of a respirator or by other suitable means. 

The shop where metal spraying is carried out should be airy and well 
ventilated or provided with efficient dust removal and air circulation 
facilities. 

3.2 Equipment — Spraying is done with a tool commonly known as the 
metal spraying pistol or gun. The motive power for the feeding of the 
wire into the flame is provided usually by an air turbine in the pistol (or 
an electric motor in some heavy duty pistols) geared down to drive rollers 
which pull the wire into the pistol and feed it into the flame. Suitable 
means of adjustment of feed speed are also provided. Compressed air is 
also used as the propellent for the atomised molten particles. 

An adequate supply of dry air free from traces of oil and at pressures 
required for operating the tool efficiently should be arranged. In addition, 
supplies of oxygen and the fuel gas that is recommended for theequipment 
as well as ancillary equipment such as pressure regulators and hoses should 
be available. Fuel gases commonly used are acetylene and propane. 

The use of flowmeters for the oxygen and the fuel gas is recommended 
since these assist in setting and maintaining correct spraying conditions 
without difficulty. 

3.3 Wires-The wire to be used for spraying should be kept wound in 
reels or spools and shall be free from kinks which hamper the smooth 
feeding of the wire through the nozzle. 



^Specification for ionones. 

10 



IS:3023-*965 

The choice of the metal and the wire size for a specific job would 
depend on a number of factors and recommendations of manufacturers of 
metal spraying equipment and other technical literature on the subject 
should be consulted. A few points of importance are, however, given 
below: 

a) Where a choice of the metal to be sprayed is possible, that metal 
should be selected which gives a coating with the lowest shrinkage 
rate (lowest co -efficient of expansion). An instance is the 
rebuilding of steel shafts where, as a general rule, high carbon 
steel (0-7 percent) is preferred to low carbon mild steel which has 
a higher shrinkage rate and also oxidises excessively during 
spraying with resultant tendencies to cracking. 

Where the finished surface has to be of a metal with a 
high shrinkage rate and the deposit has to be relatively thick, a 
metal having a low shrinkage rate should be chosen for building- 
up to within 0-5 to 1-0 mm of the finished size and the job may 
then be completed by spraying the desired wire. 

b) Where an 18/8 chrome-nickel stainless steel deposit is required 
to serve under corrosive conditions,^ it is necessary that the wire 
chosen should contain, in addition to these alloying elements, a 
stabilizer such as niobium or titanium. 

It should be noted that sprayed stainless steel is not stain- 
less unless it is ground and polished. 

c) In view of the fact that it is permissible to finish molybdenum 
deposits to a feather edge without any danger of the coating 
peeling off, it is used for building-up where only a small amount 
of metal is required such as for instance restoring a press fit. In 
such cases, after the initial bonding coat is sprayed, further 
building-up is done with the coarseness of the spray reduced 
slightly by an increase of the propellent air pressure. This results 
in a finer surface which may be finished speedily and more 
economically. Heavy thickness of sprayed molybdenum coatings 
are not recommended both on considerations of cost and cracking 
of the deposit. 

3.4 Spraying Procedure ^ — The operating conditions such as wire speed, 
gas pressure and flame conditions recommended by the manufacturers of 
the pistol should be strictly adhered to. The practice of increasing spraying 
rates over those recommended by increasing gas pressures is, in particular, 
to be avoided since this could give rise to poor results. 

The pistol should be lighted and adjusted with the spray directed 
away from the work. The work should be held in a device such as a 

11 



IS: 3023 -1965 

lathe and made to rotate at a surface speed of 9 to 15 m/min. During 
spraying tine pistol which is usually mounted on the toolpost of the lathe 
should be at a distance of 80 to 250 mm from the work depending upon 
the equipment and size of wire used. 

The ends of the undercut sections should be sprayed first with the 
angle of impingement continually varying from about 30 to 60 degrees (see 
Fig. 6 ). Corners should be built up from quarter to half the depth of the 
undercut before proceeding further. 




d =8010 250 mm 



Fio. 6 Method of Spraying End of Undercut Section 



In treating shafts prepared by the grooving and knurling method, 
after spraying the ends of the undercut sections, spraying should be 
continued with the gun held at an angle of 45 degrees to the work for at 
least five passes in each direction in order to deposit metal under each 
dovetail. Subsequent procedure is the same as that for work prepared by 
other methods. 

In work prepared by method other than grooving and'knurling, after 
the ends of the undercut sections are sprayed, the job should be completed 
by spraying at right angles to the surface. 

The spraying process shall be continuous and where practicable the 
total thickness should be applied in one pass progressively along the length 
of surface to be sprayed. It is advisable when heavy deposits are being 
applied in a single pass, to cool the work with a diffused blast of clean dry 
compressed air. Suitable means shall also be provided to prevent the 
accumulation of metal dust ahead of the spraying operation. 



If spraying in one pass is not possible, a, large number of very rapid 
light passes are permissible but separate layers of medium thickness in the 
range of 0-5 to lO mm are not good practices. 

12 



IS : 3023 -1965 

It is necessary to put on sufficient metal to allow for finishing ( usually 
about 0'25to0"40 mm on radius over the finished size ). 

The temperature of the work should, on no account, be allowed to 
exceed 150°C. Spraying should be stopped periodically if it is not possible, 
by other means, to keep down the temperature within this limit. 

After spraying is completed, the work should be allowed to cool slowly 
to room temperature. If necessary, an air blast may be used to cool the 
work as it is rotated. 

The plugs for the oil holes and dummy keys for the keywayjs may be 
removed at this stage but where possible, it is recommended' that these are 
not removed until the finishing operation is also over. 

4. FINISHING 

4.1 General- Sprayed deposits may be finished either by grinding or by 
turning, the former method being preferred. 

4.2 Grinding- Finishing sprayed deposits by grinding requires no special 
technique, normal grinding practice usually being followed. Medium soft 
wheels having vitrified bond with a No. 40 grit or soft ones with a No. 60 
grit, the abrasive being bauxite or silicon carbide, are generally recommen- 
ded for the purpose ( see IS : 715-1962*). When grinding sprayed metals, 
the wheel glazes quickly and more frequent dressing may be found 
necessary. If fine grain wheels are used, clogging may/ cause chatter. 

Grinding wet is always preferred and the surface speed of the wheel 
should be approximately 1800 to 1950 m/min, with the work turning at a 
surface speed of25 to 30 m/min. The infeed should be very light. For 
rough grinding an infeed of approximately 04 mm is used and as the job 
approaches finished size this is reduced to 0'02 mm. Two percent soluble 
oil, clean and free from foreign matter is a suitable coolant. The grinding 
wheel should never be allowed to remain immersed in the coolant, due to 
the wheel absorbing moisture and thereby becoming unbalanced. 

In dry grinding on tool post grinders, wheel speeds are usually lojver 
by about 10 percent than for wet grinding. Keeping the work smeared 
with a light layer or machine oil helps in reducing the glazing of the wheel. 
The tool post grinder used for finishing sprayed deposits should be of a 
robust type. 

4.3 Turning — If turning has to be resorted to as the method of finishing, 
tools tipped with tungsten carbide or high speed steel should be used. While 
the shape of the tool is not critical, it has been found advantageous to have 
the tool ground as shown in Fig. 7 and to the dimensions given in Table 2. 



*Specifi cation for coated abrasives, gluebond ( revised). 

13 



IS : 3023 - 1965 



15° PROVIDED BY HOLDER-\ ' 




C^"^ 




A =Nose angle 
B = Side rake angle 
C = Side relief angle 
D= Working relief angle 

JV= Nose radius 



Fig. 7 Grinding Tool Bits fob. Machining Sprayed mktals 



TABLE 2 


DIMENSIONS FOR GRINDING 
( Clause 4.3 ) 


TOOL BITS 


Dimension 


High Speed 
Tool Bits 


Cemented Carbide 
Tool Bits 


Nose angle 

Side rake angle 
Side relief angle 
Working relief angI 
Back rake angle 
Nose Radius 


80" approximately 

0"tol5" 
10" 
e 7" Max 

8" Max 
0-8 to 1-0 mm 


75" approximately 

0" 

7" 

l"Max 

8" Max 
0-8 to 1-0 mm 



The cutting edge of the tool should be either on the centre line of 
the work or not more than 5 degree above. 

The peripheral speed of cutting should be in the range of 15 to 
BOm/min for finishing sprayed steels, stainless steel and nickel. For copper 
and copper alloys speeds may be as high as 60 to 100 m/min when using 
carbide tools and 30 to 45 m/min when using high speed steel tools. 

Machining should be started near the middle of the sprayed length 
and worked out to the edges. Only very light cuts should be taken and 
the traverse of the tool should be as low as is convenient on the lathe. A 
coolant such as soluble oil may be used. 

Even with carbide tipped tools, sprayed molybdenum deposits are 
unmachinable. 

4.4 Plugs for the oil holes and dummy keys for keyways shall be removed 
after the finishing operation if this has not already been done after spraying. 
The oil ways should then be thoroughly cleaned to ensure that no metal 
particle or grit is left inside. 



14 



PUBLICATIONS OF INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

INDIAN STANDARDS 

Ov'cr 2 BOO Endjan Standardly broadljr claisified under cNe MFovving 
mftln heads, Nve been Issued m (ar: 

Agriculture & Food Electro technical 

Chfirnif^l M&c!hani<^al Enginvarifig 

Civil Engineering Structural & Metals 

Coniumcr ^roducti Textile 

Of thes«, the &candards belonging to the ScmcturBl & Heuk GrQup 
fill under thfl foMowJng categorleit 

Copper and Copp*r Alloys Precsous Mstals 

Design C&das PLefraetorlies 

Fcrro>Alllo>^5 Solders 

Foundry Steel Castings 

Lead, Zinc, Tm. Antimony and Ste^i FDrgin^s 

Their Alloyi Steel Products, Wrought 

Light Meots and Their Ailoyt Steel Tubes and PJpes 

Metallic Finlshei Structural SteeJ Sections 

Ores and R^w Materlali Welding 

Pig iron, Ca^c Iron and Unclassified 

Msllrab9«: Case Iron 



OTHEH FU&LICATION5 

iinjit Cojjy .„ ... 1-™ 

Anrtuil ^ubscHptlon - . .. i*^ IS'W 

Annual fl^eporti ( Ffo^ I94&'49 Onw«rdi ] ... ... 2'^ ca 3-Dp «i£t! 

CiuilHcct Liit of Ift-dlan Standtrdi ... ... ... 2-^ 



IMOIAht ITANDARiDI INSTITUTION 

Hradnuarimfi 
Mj|,nfch iltdmn. 9 BihidDi' Shah Zifu' Ka/j^ K*h> D«tht t 

J34S«rdiF VillnbhibJUl P«.t*l HdkeI BOmbav I Ptien* 40ir]7 

K'tf Civil L.ln*« Kj.i^Mr „ JTtfJ- 

^Tinted itl^Mul Pfici^, Nfiw T^lKhST fDifii 



